=== FOUCAULT POWER ANALYSIS (FULL) ===
Author: Michel Foucault
Title: Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth: Essential Works of Michel Foucault 1954-1984 (Penguin Modern Classics)
Chapter: 7
Words: 13103

FULL CONTENT:
INTRODUCTION The History of Systems of Thought Michel Foucault delivered his first lecture at the Collège de France, France’s most prestigious academic institution, on December 1970, at the age of forty-four.1 He named his chair at the Collège “The History of Systems of Thought.” “Systems of thought,” he wrote, “are the forms in which, during a given period of time, knowledges [savoirs] individualize, achieve an equilibrium, and enter into communication.”fn1 Foucault divided his work on the history of systems of thought into three interrelated parts, the “re-examination of knowledge, the conditions of knowledge, and the knowing subject.”2 Faithful to the broad contours of this program, he moved increasingly in the last decade or so of his life toward an emphasis on the third term, the knowing subject. As part of his application to the Collège de France, Foucault had submitted a project of instruction and research, on “the knowledge [savoir] of heredity” as a system of thought. The choice of heredity as a research topic is fully in line with the work he had carried out in cooperation with Georges Canguilhem, the historian and philosopher of the life sciences with whom he was working during this period. The project’s goal was to expand the analysis of natural history and biology, which Foucault had undertaken in The Order of Things. How did it happen, he asked, that a nonprestigious set of knowledges, such as those surrounding breeding, eventually took the form and function of a science—une connaissance scientifique—as important as genetics? In what specific fashion did this particular science “take up” more general historical events and enter into relations with other structures? The answers to these questions, Foucault held, would require philosophical concepts and detailed empirical inquiry. He wrote that, whenever possible, he would employ “a concrete example” to “serve as a testing ground for analysis.” This deceptively simple rule of thumb provided him with a powerful means to counterbalance the weaknesses and to multiply the strengths of standard historical and philosophical approaches. He drew on existing resources, putting them to new uses. From the great French tradition of the Annales school of historical analysis, he retained an emphasis on long-term and impersonal economic and social trends; from the equally distinctive French lineage of the history of science, he adopted an emphasis on concepts and epistemological rupture points. One could say, to simplify, that he sought to work at the nexus where the history of practices met the history of concepts. In 1966, Foucault had ended his most famous book, The Order of Things, impatiently awaiting the dispersal of the episteme of Man, thinking he discerned glimmers of an imminent reassemblage of language into a new form. In his inaugural lecture at the Collège, “The Order of Discourse,” he looked back to the sixth century B.C. For him, it had been a time of “Greek poets [speaking] true discourse … inspiring respect and terror … meting out justice, weaving into the fabric of fate,” before the tragic rupture, “a century later [when] Truth moved from the ritualized act—potent and just—to settle on what was enunciated: its meaning, its form, its object, and its relation to what it referred to.”3 He solemnly announced that his project—and the goal of his work—was “to question our will to truth, to restore to discourse its character as an event; to abolish the sovereignty of the signifier.”4 However, he would shortly abandon this nostalgia for a union of power, justice, and discourse. In order to rethink the goal of overcoming the will to truth, he would abandon his attempt to look back to the time of the Greek poets—just as he would forsake his state of alert, ever-attentive to signs of a coming episteme. Nevertheless, he continued to think about how to move beyond sovereign regimes of power and discourse to question the will to truth. Earlier in the inaugural lecture, Foucault wondered, “what has been, what still is, throughout our discourse, this will to truth which has survived throughout so many centuries of our history; or if we ask what is, in its very general form, the kind of division governing our will to knowledge”? He answered, “we may discern something like a system of exclusion (historical, modifiable, institutionally constraining) in the process of development.”5 This formulation is vintage Foucault. From his earliest publications, he had identified and analyzed the functions of systems of exclusions variously linked to scientific categorizations. He continued to produce analyses of the will to knowledge, but they gradually came to be situated within a different framework. The will to truth, on the other hand, maintains a rather obscure presence throughout his work. At times, he strongly contrasts the will to truth with the will to knowledge; however, almost simultaneously, it frequently seems to be totally enveloped by it. Apparently, at this point, as he entered the Collège de France, Foucault had not established an adequate conceptual framework within which to develop this opposition. The Courses The submission of “course summaries” was one of the few bureaucratic requirements at the Collège. The summaries Foucault submitted are remarkably straightforward, even didactic. The courses themselves shared this pedagogical quality, although they were often presented with exuberant humor and theatrical flair. They provide a series of preliminary sketches of extraordinary vitality and lucidity. It is essential to emphasize that the courses at the Collège were works in progress—philosophical-historical expeditions in search of new objects and new ways of relating to things. The courses can best be seen as exercises, not final performances. His inaugural course was entitled “The Will to Knowledge” (p. 11). He promised to explore, “fragment by fragment,” the “morphology of the will to knowledge,” through alternating historical inquiries and theoretical questioning. The first year’s course would provide an initial test of the place and role played by the will to knowledge in the history of the systems of thought. He began by attempting to clarify a set of distinctions: “between knowledge [savoir] and learning [connaissance]; the differences between the will to knowledge [savoir] and the will to truth [vérité]; the position of the subject, or subjects, in relation to that will.” His reference to “that will” is mysterious, given that he has just distinguished two types. Although grammatically the referent is “the will to truth,” Foucault immediately turned the course to “the will to knowledge.”6 This condensation of the two “wills” arises in part from the figures Foucault chose to compare, Aristotle and Nietzsche, and the manner in which he cast the comparison, as exemplars, extreme and opposed cases. Foucault interpreted Aristotle as representing the universal and naturalistic pole. For Aristotle, there is an essential pregiven harmony between sensation, pleasure, knowing, and truth. Our perceptual apparatus is constituted in such a way that it establishes a link of pleasure and of (above all visual) knowledge, even when such a link serves no direct utilitarian purpose. The same economy extends all the way up the hierarchy through to the highest form of knowing, contemplation. As posited in the famous opening lines of the Metaphysics, the desire to know is essential to who we are, and is ours “by nature.” Our nature is to seek knowledge, and we take pleasure through doing so. He offers Nietzsche’s The Gay Science, on the other hand, as a total contrast to Aristotle’s naturalism. Nietzsche’s knowledge (connaissance) is not an appropriation of universals but an invention that masks the basest instincts, interests, desires, and fears.7 There is no preestablished harmony of these drives and the world—just the contingent, temporary, and malicious products of deceitful wills, striving for advantage, fighting for survival and engaged in a ceaseless effort to forcefully impose their will on each other. Knowledge is not a natural faculty but a series of struggles, a weapon in the universal war of domination and submission. Knowledge is always secondary to those more primary struggles. It is linked not to pleasure in flourishing but harnessed to hatred and struggle. Truth is our longest lie, our most intimate ally and enemy. The interpretation Foucault gives of both thinkers at this moment, because it provides such an absolute contrast, does not allow for a fruitful distinction between the will to knowledge and the will to truth. He seems to affirm their functional identity in Western history, a distinction without a difference. Had Foucault chosen Aristotle’s Ethics rather than his Metaphysics as his paradigmatic text, these same relations of pleasure, knowledge, and the body would have been present, but they would have taken a different form. Over the course of the next decade, he would reexamine the elements of his interpretation of both Aristotle and Nietzsche and recombine them differently. Later on Foucault would indeed come a good deal closer to posing the relations of pleasure, friendship, and practices of truth as a problem, in a way reminiscent of the Ethics, although he would never adopt Aristotle’s answers, or his metaphysics. The Move Toward Power During the early seventies, for reasons his biographers have sought to explain in terms of his personal life, Foucault began to move away from these philosophical themes as well as the project on heredity. Rather, he devoted his courses to material directly related to technologies of power. These themes will be treated more fully in Volume Three of this series; however, it is vital to an understanding of his eventual thoughts on ethics to underline several key changes here. In 1975–76, he entitled his course “Society Must Be Defended” (p. 59). The course began with a despondent, almost despairing apology for what he characterized as his thinking’s directionless drift. While he had intended to bring the work of recent years to completion in his current lectures, he was at a loss on how to do so. He lamented that “[t]hough these researches were very closely related to each other, they have failed to develop into any continuous or coherent whole.”8 This confession seems severe given the publication of Discipline and Punish in 1975 and in 1976 The History of Sexuality, vol. 1. Obliged to continue teaching, Foucault decided to take up the question of power relations. According to him, we lacked an adequate understanding of power as something other than a reflection of economic structures. Two alternatives were available: one that equates mechanisms of power with repression, another that locates “the basis of the relationship of power in the hostile engagement of forces …. For convenience, I shall call this Nietzsche’s hypothesis.”9 The first model, associated with the eighteenth-century philosophes and their precursors, proceeds from the social contract in which individuals give up their natural rights to a sovereign in a contractual agreement for peace and prosperity. The model contains explicit normative limits; when the sovereign extends his power beyond the contractual stipulations, then his use of power can be called oppression. Legitimate power is finite.10 In the contrastive model (the couplet war-domination), power is understood as a perpetual relationship of force whose only goal is submission, the norm of power has no internal limitation: power seeks only victory. “It is obvious,” Foucault told his audience, “that all my work in recent years has been couched in terms of” the second model. However, “I have been forced to reconsider [it] both because it is insufficient” and because its key notions “must be considerably modified if not ultimately abandoned.” This forced reconsideration follows from the conclusion that “it is wholly inadequate to the analysis of the mechanisms and effects of power that it is so pervasively used to characterize today.”11 A problem was coming into focus. By the end of the year, Foucault submitted a crisp course summary: “In order to conduct a concrete analysis of power relations, one would have to abandon the juridical model of sovereignty. That model assumes the individual as a subject of natural rights or original powers” (p. 59). Foucault never seriously entertained a view of the individual as bearer of natural rights. There is an analogy between the figure of the individual endowed with primitive powers and the Nietzschean subject Foucault had invoked as the contrastive and polar opposite to Aristotle in his first year of lectures at the Collège. To the extent that the Nietzschean subject had itself been insufficiently submitted to genealogical scrutiny, it needed to be rethought. The questions Foucault posed in his 1975–76 lectures lend support to this reexamination. How and when, Foucault asked, did we moderns begin to interpret (déchiffrer) power relations as examples of warfare? Is warfare the general model for all social relations? How did an interpretation emerge that viewed the subject as endowed with primitive powers of antagonism, proclivities for war, mutual antagonism? When and where did a historico-political discourse of war substitute for a philosophico-juridical discourse of sovereignty? How is it that truths came to function as arms? How did it come to be that within such a discourse, there emerged a subject for whom universal truth and natural law (droit général) came to be seen as illusions or snares? How did this somber, critical, and intensely mythical form of self-understanding and practice emerge? Under what conditions did this figure arise who refuses the role of mediator, of neutral arbiter, a role philosophers have assigned to themselves from Solon to Kant to Habermas? How should we analyze a principle of interpretation that proceeds from violence, hatred, passions, revenge, that makes brute givens such as vigor, physique, force, and temperament the underpinnings of thought; that views history as a series of chance events? What has been the trajectory of such a historical discourse that can be advanced both by bearers of aristocratic nostalgia as well as popular revenge? Pursuing this line of inquiry would make it possible not only to answer the question of how von Clausewitz became possible but, more unexpectedly, to pose the question of how Nietzsche became possible. By the publication of “The Will to Knowledge” in 1976, Foucault had reshaped his understanding of power relations. He was also on the road to transforming his understanding of knowledge and the subject. Foucault coined the phrase the “speaker’s benefit” for those who combined “a discourse in which sex, the revelation of truth, the overturning of global laws, the proclamation of a new day to come, and the promise of a certain felicity are linked together.”12 Foucault’s sarcasm about this longing for a space of knowledge simultaneously outside formations of power and yet capable of undermining them all reaches its rueful culmination in the closing lines of the first volume of The History of Sexuality: “The irony of this deployment is in having us believe that our ‘liberation’ is in the balance.”13 The highest form of irony is self-irony. Although the main target of the speaker’s benefit was the reigning militant orthodoxy in France, Foucault was equally looking back over a path he himself had traveled. His true problem, he began to think, was “the subject” and its relations to the will to truth. Over the next four years, Foucault carried out a major recasting and consolidation of his core conceptual tools. The details of this complex rethinking will receive extended treatment in the introduction to Volume Three of this series. Nevertheless, it is again crucial to underline a central shift in his views on power relations, for it situates the problems that his later thought sought to address. During the courses of the late seventies, Foucault further refined his view of power relations. Simply and schematically, he concluded: “It seems to me we must distinguish between power relations understood as strategic games between liberties—in which some try to control the conduct of others, who in turn try to avoid allowing their conduct to be controlled or try to control the conduct of others—and the states of domination that people ordinarily call ‘power.’ And between the two, between games of power and states of domination, you have technologies of government—understood, of course, in a very broad sense ….” To denote this broad understanding of government, Foucault used the term governmentality. It implies, he continued, “the relationship of the self to itself, and … [covers] the range of practices that constitute, define, organize and instrumentalize the strategies which individuals in their freedom can use in dealing with each other. I believe that the concept of governmentality makes it possible to bring out the freedom of the subject and its relationship to others—which constitutes the very stuff [matière] of ethics.” Beginning from this premise, Foucault understands thought as the exercise of freedom.14 SIGNS OF EXISTENCE In 1979, Foucault reviewed The Era of Ruptures by his friend Jean Daniel, the editor of a Parisian weekly, Le Nouvel observateur, to which Foucault had regularly contributed political commentary. His review, “Pour une morale de l’inconfort”15 (best translated as “For an Ethic of Discomfort” for reasons that will be elucidated below), is a kind of editorial—a combination of praise, reflection, and advocacy—addressed to the journal’s urbane, leftist audience at a time when their political arid intellectual hopes were rather dampened. Foucault set forth several guiding principles and themes, to which he would return incessantly in the remaining years of his life, albeit in different contexts and using different forms (see, for example, “What is Enlightenment?” p. 303). He began by invoking a question posed in 1784 by the Berlinische Monatsschrift to a number of leading Aufklärer, including Kant: “What is Enlightenment?” The question, as well as Kant’s response, would preoccupy Foucault over the next several years. These reflections provided him with a starting point from which to transform the newspaper’s question and Kant’s answer into a different question—“What is modernity?”—or, as he posed it in his book review, “who are we in the present, what is this fragile moment from which we can’t detach our identity and which will carry that identity away with itself?” Good journalism required a passion for stalking the elusive singularity of the present. More challenging yet was the task of observing oneself, with a certain distance, in the process of practicing this métier, midst the hurly-burly of everyday events, crises, deadlines, and myriad pressing demands. Foucault was intrigued by the fact that some journalists were better suited than philosophers and political activists for the task of sustaining a supple, yet critical, stance in the swirl of passing scenes, of resisting the temptation to always have a “position.” Foucault praised Jean Daniel for his deft handling of this ever-renewed demand on the left to have a firm, well-defended, vantage point for anchoring one’s analysis. Vantage point, after all, is a military term connoting an overall perspective from afar, the proverbial bird’s-eye-view—but strategic advantage, however, does not necessarily provide understanding. For Foucault, in order to establish the right relationship to the present—to things, to others, to oneself—one must stay close to events, experience them, be willing to be effected and affected by them. Foucault was not singing the praises of vacillation and indecision, or of a total refusal of perspective. Banality of thought, resolute opportunism, or a program of deconstruction and transgression as ends in themselves all seemed to him to be equally dubious. “The demand [exigence] for an identity,” he insisted, “and the injunction to break that identity, both feel, in the same way, abusive.”16 Such demands are abusive because they assume in advance what one is, what one must do, what one always must be closed to, which side one must be on. He sought not so much to resist as to evade this installed dichotomy. One might say he refused the blackmail of having to choose between a unified, unchanging identity and a stance of perpetual and obligatory transgression. “One’s way [façon] of no longer remaining the same,” he wrote, “is, by definition, the most singular part of who I am.” However, that singularity was never a blanket negation: if one knew in advance that everything, including one’s self and the current state of affairs, was bad, what would there be to learn? What would be the sense of acting? Why think? A life without the possibility of error would not be conceivable. One might say, following Georges Canguilhem, such a life would not be alive. Who one is, Foucault wrote, emerges acutely out of the problems with which one struggles. In the review, he phrased his approach in a manner so as to distance it from Sartre and his version of the committed intellectual: “Experience with … rather than engagement in …” Privileging experience over engagement makes it increasingly difficult to remain “absolutely in accord with oneself,” for identities are defined by trajectories, not by position taking. Such an attitude is an uncomfortable one insofar as one risks being mistaken and is vulnerable to the perfect hindsight of those who adopt firm positions (especially after events have passed) or who speak assuredly of universals as though the singular were secondary. To that extent, one could say, adopting a distinction Foucault developed in his work leading up to the second volume of The History of Sexuality, The Uses of Pleasure, that this attitude is rooted in an ethics and not a morality, a practice rather than a vantage point, an active experience rather than a passive waiting. The challenge is not to replace one certitude (évidence) with another but to cultivate an attention to the conditions under which things become “evident,” ceasing to be objects of our attention and therefore seemingly fixed, necessary, and unchangeable. A few pages later in the review, Foucault approvingly invoked Maurice Merleau-Ponty’s definition of the task of philosophy, “to never consent to be completely at ease with what seems evident to oneself.” What seems so new, if we are attentive, often can be seen to have been around, at the back of our minds, at the corner of our vision, at the edge of things we almost, but never quite, saw or said. “The most fragile of passing moments has its antecedents. There is a whole ethics of an alert certitude [évidence] which doesn’t exclude a rigorous economy of Truth and Falsity, far from it, but isn’t summed up by that economy either.”17 Philosophy is a practice and an ethos, a state or condition of character, not detached observation and legislation. “What is philosophy after all? if not a means of reflecting on not so much on what is true or false but on our relation to truth? How, given that relation to truth, should we act?” (“The Masked Philosopher,” p. 321) In this formulation, we see the thinker as nominalist engaged in a reexamination of knowledge, the conditions of knowledge, and the knowing subject. The Masked Philosopher Foucault’s exasperation with what he continued to see and feel as political posturing and lack of imagination in France found another articulation in an anonymous interview he gave in April 1980 to the leading French daily, Le Monde, which was interviewing leading thinkers about their views on the current scene. He refused to join in this vogue of condemning “intellectuals,” which was sweeping Paris as a part of rejection of the media and its supposed destructive influence on French political and intellectual culture: “I’ve never met any intellectuals. I have met people who write novels, and others who treat the sick; people who work in economics and others who compose electronic music. I’ve met people who teach, people who paint and people of whom I have never really understood what they do. But intellectuals? Never” (p. 322). His sarcasm was aimed at what he saw as the reigning style of criticism, one based on denunciation, condemnation, judgment of guilt, and attempts to silence and ultimately to destroy the object of criticism. He lyrically but pointedly evoked an alternative: “I can’t help but dream about a kind of criticism that would try not to judge but to bring an oeuvre, a sentence, an idea to life; it would light fires, watch the grass grow, listen to the wind, and catch the sea foam in the breeze and scatter it. It would multiply not judgments but signs of existence; it would summon them, drag them from their sleep …. It would bear the lightning of possible storms.” We should remember that he agreed to the interview on condition that he remain anonymous, that he be referred to simply as “the masked philosopher.” Apparently not many readers guessed that Foucault—whom many thought of as “the nihilist,” “the deconstructionist”—had spoken these words. Well and good, the interviewer persisted, but isn’t the present, after all, a time of mediocrity and lowered expectations? Foucault responded with an emphatic no to that commonplace as well. Quite the contrary, he insisted: it is a propitious time. “There is an overabundance of things to be known: fundamental, terrible, wonderful, funny, insignificant, and crucial at the same time. And there is an enormous curiosity, a need, a desire to know …. Curiosity is seen as futility. However, … it evokes “care”; it evokes the care one takes of what exists and what might exist; a sharpened sense of reality, but one that is never immobilized before it; a readiness to find what surrounds us strange and odd; a certain determination to throw off familiar ways of thought and to look at the same things in a different way; a passion for seizing what is happening now and what is disappearing; a lack of respect for traditional hierarchies of what is important and fundamental. I dream of a new age of curiosity. We have the technical means; the desire is there; there is an infinity of things to know; the people capable of doing such work exist” (p. 325). Curiosity: a simple little thing. At this time, one of Foucault’s cherished projects was to create a different kind of publishing in France. After Editions Gallimard, the prestigious house that published his major books in huge print runs, refused his offer to edit a small series of books, Foucault (along with Paul Veyne and François Wahl) succeeded in convincing another distinguished Parisian publisher, Les Editions du Seuil, to initiate a series entitled “Works” (Des Travaux). The purpose of the series was to publish works that might be considered too long and difficult—hence lacking an immediate audience—but that over time would show their importance, short pieces outlining the main points of future work to be developed over time, and translations of important foreign works with no large market in France. Foucault and friends provided a trenchant definition of “work” as “that which is susceptible of introducing a meaningful difference in the field of knowledge, albeit with a certain demand placed on the author and reader, but with the eventual recompense of a certain pleasure, that is to say of an access to another figure of truth.”18 Arenas: Iran, Poland, USA “Where are we today?” Foucault asked his readers to ask themselves in 1979.19 At a moment of the globalization of the economy? “Certainly.” At a moment of global geopolitics as well. But, he wondered, was thought also in a globalizing moment? It seemed to him that the answer was no: he discerned no indications of an emergent universal philosophy or political consciousness. In France, in his view, this contradictory conjuncture had yielded a stifling combination of ever-more empty rhetorical allegiance to the receding utopia of a universal revolution, accompanied by a pervasive social conservatism. How then, to “tear oneself away from” that predicament? His almost visceral rejection of French bourgeois moeurs was a long-standing one that he shared with other French writers he admired, such as Flaubert. A young Canadian interviewer’s assertion that France held an enduring attraction for North Americans elicited this retort: “Yes, but now I don’t think they come to Paris any longer for freedom. They come to have a taste of an old traditional culture. They come to France as painters went to Italy in the seventeenth century, to see a dying civilization” (p. 123). That is why, he explained, he had lived in Sweden, in Poland, in Germany, in Tunisia, and in the United States and had made repeated trips to Brazil and Japan. During the late seventies and early eighties, Foucault’s main areas of political and social activity were outside France. He went to Iran for an Italian newspaper as an eyewitness to the period leading up to the fall of the Shah and the triumph of the Khomeini regime. Surely he had in mind a maxim he had applied approvingly to Jean Daniel’s work, that of not giving “our unhesitant support [confiance] to any revolution, even if one can understand each revolt.”20 He was fascinated by the type of political action taking place, the massive presence of an underarmed populace in the streets facing a police force and army among the world’s most brutal and omnipresent. A revolution was taking place, but it was one that made the European Left uneasy. It was hard to identify class dynamics, social divisions, a vanguard party, or political ideology as the driving force; these “lacks” intrigued Foucault. He was intrigued by the question of the role of religion in political life, of the unexpected and resurgent role it was playing. He reminded his European readers that the sentence preceding Marx’s famous phrase about religion being the opium of the people, spoke of “the spirit of a world without spirit.” He saw or felt—or thought he saw—hints of such a spirit, and of a possible role it might have in forming the self in a different relationship to politics. Foucault mused that until his visit to Iran he had only read about the collective will. In Iran, it seemed that he had encountered it in the streets, focused in determined opposition to the Shah. He wondered what to make of “the vocabulary, the ceremonial, the timeless drama into which one could fit the historical drama of a people that pitted its very existence against that of the sovereign.”21 Foucault was fascinated, perhaps above all, by what he saw as a demand for a new subjectivity. He felt he discerned an imperative that went beyond overthrowing yet another corrupt, Western-supported authoritarian regime, an imperative he formulated thus: “above all we have to change ourselves. Our way of being, our relationships with others, with things, with eternity, with God.”22 He grappled with this intuition, repeating a similar hypothesis on several occasions. “What is the meaning for these people, to seek out, at the price of their lives, that thing whose very possibility we Europeans have forgotten at least since the Renaissance and the period of the great crises of Christianity—a spirituality. I can hear the French laughing at these words, but they are making a mistake.”23 Foucault intended to examine this issue of political spirituality and its changing relationships with self-fashioning as soon as he finished the seemingly interminable rewriting of the “Greek and Christian books.” In the early eighties, he proposed a two-pronged research project with colleagues and students at Berkeley—on political spirituality and self-fashioning in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and the arts of socialist governmentality in the twenties. The latter project was linked to a dialogue he had undertaken with representatives of the main noncommunist labor union, the Confédération Française des Travailleurs Démocratique (CFDT), on such matters as the future of the social security system. He was intrigued by the spirit of the seemingly futile efforts of Solidarity in Poland, which he actively supported and with whom the CFDT forged close ties. Foucault went to Poland on a number of occasions, not just to meet and discuss the situation with various participants but to seek out rather humble work as a bookkeeper. When martial law was imposed in December 1981, France’s Socialist government made only perfunctory protests. Foucault, like many others, took to the streets. And as Iran faded from Western public attention, and Poland endured in the gray night of martial law, Foucault seriously considered working anonymously with the humanitarian group Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors Without Borders), or of retiring to the countryside to practice spiritual exercises and tend his garden. Although he did not pursue either of these escape fantasies, his increasing preoccupation with the theme of “the care of the self” dovetailed with his efforts to bring the later volumes of The History of Sexuality to completion. During this period, he made frequent visits to California and New York. Until the late seventies, he had been openly, if discreetly, homosexual in the then current French style.24 In the context of his work on the care of the self, though, he began to rethink publicly homosexual and homosocial relationships, embarking on a distinctive series of explorations and reflections on emergent forms of pleasure, sociality, and thought. In California, his explorations and reflections on gay life in San Francisco are well known; less has been made of the fact that, when in California, he spent his days at the University of California in Berkeley, working in the libraries, talking with colleagues, holding seminars, and meeting students. It seems fair to say that Foucault was experimenting in his own life with the twin imperatives to “know thyself” and to “care for thyself.” A MODERN ETHOS Max Weber, Foucault argued, had placed the following question on the historical, sociological, and ethical agenda: “If one wants to behave rationally and regulate one’s action according to true principles, what part of one’s self should one renounce? What is the ascetic price of reason?” He continued, “For my part, I have posed the opposite question: How have certain kinds of interdictions become the price required for attaining certain kinds of knowledge [savoir] about oneself? What must one know [connaître] about oneself in order to be willing to accept such renunciation?” The latter formulation is a guiding thread in Foucault’s historical work in the second and third volumes of The History of Sexuality, as well as in the unpublished fourth volume, Confessions of the Flesh. Despite his reformulation of Weber’s question, Foucault’s core concern applies equally well to Foucault himself—what is the place of asceticism in a philosophic life? If asceticism is taken as “exercise” and not as renunciation (and this is precisely how Foucault takes it up in his later work), then the question becomes: How is reason exercised? How is reason practiced? One of the main themes Foucault explored in the early eighties was “the care of the self.” The nearly complete uncoupling of this imperative from its twin, “know yourself,” is an essential element of his diagnosis of modernity, in which the latter imperative was gradually to eclipse the former as a philosophical object. From Descartes to Husserl, the imperative to “know thyself” increasingly predominated over that to “take care of thyself.” As the “care of the self” had traditionally passed through or entailed relationships with others, this disproportionate weighting of knowledge has contributed to the “universal unbrotherliness” that caused Weber so much pain and which he lacked the tools to do more than decry. For Foucault the equation of philosophical askēsis with renunciation of feeling, solidarity, and care for one’s self and for others—as the price of knowledge—was one of our biggest wrong turnings. However, reversing such a course is not merely a matter of willing or desiring it to be otherwise. What could be more self-delusional than the recent heralding of a reenchantment of the world, or that we have actually never been modern? As this trajectory became clearer to him, Foucault aimed at rethinking this separation. Rather than seek to force a reconciliation, he focused on whether the “universal unbrotherliness” produced by the will to knowledge, which had previously seemed like a necessary component of modernity—the price to be paid for knowledge and ethics—might well be more contingent than Weber had thought. He began thinking his way around this culturally coherent but humanly intolerable outcome by radically recasting what Weber would have called “a vocation”—something that Foucault called an “ethics” understood as an ethos. Care of the Self In an interview published as “The Ethic of the Concern for the Self as a Practice of Freedom” (p. 281), Foucault provides an unusually unqualified formulation of his philosophical and ethical work. He reiterates that his project has always been to untangle the relations between the subject and truth. Although his argument is not presented as a set of working premises, it is convenient and plausible to view it this way. Premise one: “what is ethics, if not the practice of freedom, the considered [réfléchie] practice of freedom” (p. 284). “Freedom is the ontological condition of ethics. But ethics is the considered form that freedom takes” (p. 284). Thus, a condition of liberty is the ontological starting point. Premise two: In the Western tradition, “taking care of oneself requires knowing [connaître] oneself” (p. 285). “To take care of the self is to equip oneself with these truths” (p. 285). It is through these tools and this conceptual linkage that “ethics is linked to the game of truth” (p. 285). Premise three: Ethics is not just a theory—it is equally a practice, an embodiment, a style of life. Hence, the problem is to give liberty “shape in an ethos” (p. 286). Premise four: the subject “is not a substance. It is a form, and this form is not primarily or always identical to itself” (p. 290). “Self is a reflexive pronoun, and it has two meanings. Auto means ‘the same,’ but it also conveys the notion of identity. The latter meaning shifts the question from ‘What is this self?’ to ‘Departing from what ground shall I find my identity?’” (p. 230). Premise five: The central arena of inquiry is the historical constitution of these forms and their relation to “games of truth.” A game of truth is a “set of procedures that lead to a certain result, which, on the basis of its principles and rules of procedure, may be considered valid or invalid” (p. 297). [W]hy truth? … And why must the care of the self occur only through the concern for truth? [This is] the question for the West. How did it come about that all of Western culture began to revolve around this obligation of truth …?” (p. 295). Given these premises, one must conclude equally that “one escaped from a domination of truth” only by playing that game differently (p. 295). Premise six: “the relationship between philosophy and politics is permanent and fundamental” (p. 293). By “politics” Foucault means both power relations and the life of the city as understood in the ancient world, the modern equivalent being “governmentality.” Premise seven: Philosophy, understood as a practice and a problem, is a vocation. The manner in which liberty is taken up by the philosopher is distinctive, differing in “intensity” and “zeal” from other free citizens (p. 293). Since the Enlightenment, while demand for an ethics has been incessant, the philosophical fulfillment of that demand has been notably scarce. This impasse has led to many fundamentalist projects, none of which has achieved any general acceptance, even among the philosophers and moralists. Such a meager harvest has also led to the categorical or partial rejection of such projects. Foucault himself argued in The Order of Things that there could be no moral system in modernity, if by “moral system” one meant a philosophical anthropology that produced firm foundations concerning the nature of Man and, thereby, a basis for human action. Ultimately, though, Foucault may well be remembered as one of the major ethical thinkers of modernity. Foucault sets up two “ideal” types of moral systems: one that emphasizes the moral code, and another that emphasizes ethical practices. Within systems of the first type, “the authority that enforces the code, [takes] a quasi-juridical form, the subject refers his conduct to a law, or set of laws.”25 The great monotheistic religious systems exemplify this type of moral system. In the second ideal-typical form, which Foucault associated with the ancient world, it is the “mode of subjectivation”—the way a subject freely relates to himself—that receives greater elaboration. In this type of system, the codes and explicit rules of behavior may be rudimentary, while greater attention is paid to the methods, techniques, and exercises directed at forming the self within a nexus of relationships. In such a system, authority would be self-referential and might take a therapeutic or philosophical form. He stressed that, in practice, these forms were not wholly distinct—subject-oriented practices have been widespread in Christianity, just as there were moral prohibitions in the ethical practices of the ancient world. Nonetheless, the contrast is an instructive one. In Volumes Two and Three of The History of Sexuality, Foucault undertook a restorative historical analysis of the place of the self-formation as an “ethical subject” in the ancient world. He describes this process as one in which “the individual delimits that part of himself that will form the object of his moral practice, defines his position relative to the precept that he will follow, and decides on a certain mode of being that will serve his moral goal.”26 His goal in this analysis was not to “return” to some archaic mode of social order but, rather, to make visible a bygone way of approaching the self and others which might suggest possibilities for the present. He was seeking not to denaturalize the “subject of desire,” not to invent a philosophic system per se, but to contribute to a mode of living. He thought that elements of that possible mode of living were already in existence: he sought to learn from and strengthen these, not to discover or “invent” others. In that spirit, it seems worthwhile to turn his ethical categories onto his own thought—something he himself did not do—in order to identity and illuminate his singular enterprise. The Ethical Fourfold Foucault saw ethical analysis as the free relationship to the self (rapport à soi)—a relationship that could be examined through four basic categories: ethical substance, mode of subjectivation, ethical work, and telos. Although he treats these categories as independent one from the other, he recognizes that, in any historical instance, they are always found in a specific configuration. In his genealogy of the subject of desire, he gives us historical examples of how such an analytics of ethics had been elaborated, of the internal systematicity, and of the differential mode of alteration over time. His goal in these historical analyses was to loosen the grip of our self-understanding as “subjects of desire,” so as to make possible a different relationship to our thought, ourselves and others, as well as to our pleasures. However, as he was wont to say, there is more. What if one was undertaking not only a history of sexuality but also a genealogy of ethics? How, then, would one cast the analytics of a free relationship to the self that a life of thinking entailed? In an interview in Berkeley (“On the Genealogy of Ethics,” p. 253), he was asked why he was not intending to talk more about friendship in his forthcoming books. He responded, “don’t forget L’Usage des plaisirs is a book about sexual ethics; it’s not a book about love, or about friendship, or about reciprocity …. Friendship is reciprocal and sexual relations are not reciprocal” (p. 257). “What I want to ask is: Are we able to have an ethics of acts and their pleasures which would be able to take into account the pleasure of the other?” (p. 258). There are two important points here. First, Foucault makes it clear that the content of the ethical discussion he provides in Volumes Two and Three of The History of Sexuality follow from the subject matter under discussion. As we shall see, the general categories of ethics he provides can be elaborated differently in the context of a different genealogy. At the end of the Archaeology of Knowledge, he stated that it would have been perfectly possible to construct other archaeologies of other objects, and that he was never talking about the spirit of an age or a unified understanding of being. Second, he is very clear that he is not advocating a “return” to the Greek model of sexual or human relations. Ancient Greek society was characterized by essential inequalities and nonreciprocities that moderns can only find intolerable. Consequently, what he identifies in the ancient world is a problematic, a way of thinking about ethical issues, and a form of practice—askēsis—integrally linked to that thought. It should be stressed again, though, that when in 1984 Foucault was asked if he found the ancient Greeks admirable, he answered: “Not very …. They were stymied right away by what seems to be the point of contradiction of ancient morality: between, on the one hand, this obstinate search for a certain style of existence and, on the other hand, the effort to make it common to everyone, a style that they approached more or less obscurely with Seneca and Epictetus but which would find the possibility of realization only within a religious style. All of antiquity appears to me to have been a ‘profound error’ (laughs).”27 It is not entirely clear what exactly he was laughing at: certainly not the obstinate search for a style of existence. Was it the religious stylization? Was it the effort to make a stylized life common? The offending term appears to be “common,” understood as uniform. Foucault definitely rejected two possible interpretations of what “common” could mean: either that a class location or professional identity was the sine qua non of liberty and, hence, of ethics; or that everyone would have the same stylization. Foucault unequivocally equated the latter project with normalization and the will to knowledge, and there is no reason to believe he ever entertained the former (although the issue of “leisure” to pursue such questions remains unaddressed). This answer, perhaps appropriately, leaves entirely open how general and diverse Foucault thought such a project could be. ETHICAL SUBSTANCE: THE WILL TO TRUTH. The way that the individual has to constitute this or that part of himself as the prime material of his moral conduct—Foucault28 For Foucault as a thinker, the ethical substance, the prime material of moral conduct, is the “will to truth.” As we have seen, in the course summary of his first year at the Collège, he summarized his comparison between Aristotle and Nietzsche, discussed archaic practices of establishing the truth in the context of justice, and elucidated the general goal of his work. The primary, perhaps ultimate, task he had set for himself was to establish “the difference between the will to knowledge [savoir] and the will to truth [vérité]; the position of the subject, or subjects with respect to that will” (p. 12). The lion’s share of Foucault’s work centered on [t]he historical analysis of this rancorous will to knowledge.”29 He did not abandon his attention to the dangers of knowledge-power complexes, even as he cautiously moved away from a central focus on the “will to knowledge.” He categorically refused appeals to “science, religion, or law” as the basis upon which a free person could shape his life. For him, whatever we were to become, it could not be legitimated by the will to knowledge. Still, of the will to truth he said very, very little. In his 1971 essay, “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” he offered an utterly bleak picture of modernity: [T]he will to truth … loses all sense of limitations and all claim to truth in its unavoidable sacrifice of the subject of knowledge.”30 In “The Order of Discourse,” he had told his audience it was “[as] though the will to truth and its vicissitudes were masked by truth itself and its necessary unfolding.”31 The “as though” presents the smallest sliver of maneuvering space. Thirteen years later, in the introduction to The Uses of Pleasure, Foucault formulated his problem thus: “How, why and in what forms is thinking constituted as a moral domain?”32 A few paragraphs later he could ingenuously write, “As for what motivated me, it is quite simple; I would hope that in the eyes of some people it might be sufficient in itself. It was curiosity—the only kind of curiosity, in any case, that is worth acting upon with a degree of obstinacy; not the curiosity that seeks to assimilate what is proper for one to know, but that which enables one to get free of oneself.”33 Foucault presents curiosity as a modest impulse, but his qualification that curiosity is what enables one “to get free of oneself”—the telos of his ethics—signals that the stakes of this simple little thing could not be higher. “But, then, what is philosophy today—philosophical activity, I mean—if it is not the critical work that thought brings to bear on itself”34 In another version of the preface to The Uses of Pleasure, Foucault wrote, “It is easy to see how the reading of Nietzsche in the early fifties has given access to these kinds of questions.” Nietzsche does indeed provide access to these kinds of questions. In The Gay Science, he had already specified the problem: “This unconditional will to truth—what is it? Is it the will not to allow oneself to be deceived? Or is it the will not to deceive?” He concludes: “Consequently ‘will to truth’ does not mean ‘I will not allow myself to be deceived’ but—there is no alternative—‘I will not deceive, even myself’; and with that we stand on moral ground.”35 Nietzsche and Weber are clearly Foucault’s precursors in making these topics into problems. MODE OF SUBJECTIVATION: SELF-STYLIZATION OR FORM-GIVING. The way in which the individual establishes his relation to the rule and recognizes himself as obligated to put it into practice.—Foucault36 M.F. What strikes me is the fact that, in our society, art has become something that is related only to objects and not to individuals or to life. That art is something which is specialized or done by experts who are artists. But couldn’t everyone’s life become a work of art? Why should the lamp or the house be an art object, but not our life? Q. Of course, that kind of project is very common in places like Berkeley …. M.F. But I am afraid in most of those cases, most of the people think if they do what they do, if they live as they live, the reason is that they know the truth about desire, life, nature, body and so on. (pp. 261–262) For Foucault, the challenge of the mode of subjectivation is not to base one’s subjectivity, that multidimensional relationship (to others, to things, and to ourselves) on any science, nor on any previously established doctrine. In “What is Enlightenment?” he wrote: “I wonder whether we may not envisage modernity as an attitude rather than as a period of history. And by ‘attitude,’ I mean a mode of relating to contemporary reality; a voluntary choice made by certain people; in the end, a way of thinking and feeling; a way, too, of acting and behaving that at one and the same time marks a relation of belonging and presents itself as a task” (p. 309). This “belonging” is relation to the society in its historical and political determinations, with its embedded and embodied strictures, its sedimented orders of thought. The “task” is to determine what must be shown to be contingent, and what can be shown to be truly singular in the present. An essential aspect of doing this work is to take up a stylized relationship to things, to oneself, and to others. The question is, What form should such a relationship take? In “What is Enlightenment?” Foucault presents two exemplary modes of subjectivation, one personified by Kant, the other by Baudelaire. Kant took up this question in an original way, by transforming it from an issue of epochs or of pure reason into a question of the thinker’s relationship to the present—to temporality understood as memory.37 Foucault restates Kant’s question thus: “What difference does today introduce with respect to yesterday?” (p. 305). What difference does the present make to our thinking? For Kant, addressing this question put one on the road from an “immature” state marked by a lack of thought, or reflection upon dependency toward “maturity.” Kant problematized the relationship between the will, authority, and reason. For him, thinking about the relationship of these terms was not only a process but, equally, a task and an obligation. We are responsible for our own maturity. Consequently, it is through the obligation to work on ourselves that we may discover the way to a proper relationship to the Enlightenment—we will “dare to know.” Kant proposed a political contract with the “rational despot” Frederick II: an exchange of political subservience for the free use of the rational faculties. However, this contract was not something Foucault was willing to endorse. Baudelaire also privileged a particular relationship to temporality—characterized by keen attentiveness to the passing moment. However, he transformed the Enlightenment attitude into one of “modernity.” In his now-classic manifesto, The Painter of Modern Life, Baudelaire identified the modern artist’s challenge as one of seizing the eternal within the “contingent, fleeting, volatile” present. What he sought was not behind or beyond the present but within it. The artist had not merely to observe the carnival parading in front of him with the disinterested, ironic, blasé attitude of the flâneur but rather to heroize the present by “taking hold” (prendre) of it. For Baudelaire, the artist has “no right to despise the present”; hence, it is his business—through an act of will—to seize hold of it. This is only half the story, though. The point of seizing hold of the present is to transfigure it. As Foucault understands it, Baudelaire’s “transfiguration entails not the annulling of reality but a difficult interplay between the truth of what is real and the exercise of freedom” (p. 311). Transfiguration is not transgression; transgression is a word Foucault does not employ in his later work.38 Rather, Foucault sought in Baudelaire the means to invent a different attitude toward the world and the self, one more respectful and ultimately more difficult to achieve. Just as he drew from Kant an attention to the historical singularity of reason as a practice, so, in a parallel way—and one closer to the original text he was interpreting—he drew from Baudelaire a stylization of the self as an exercise “in which extreme attention to what is real is confronted with the practice of a liberty that simultaneously respects this reality and violates it” (p. 311). Baudelaire gives form to the self in art. He never imagined, Foucault insists, that such stylization could operate on “society itself or on the body politic” (p. 312). Foucault proposes a stylization of the practices and exercises of the self taken as an attitude—a relationship—that clearly draws from the models of Kant and Baudelaire. However, unlike Kant, Foucault does not accept social and political conformity as the tradeoff for freedom of thought; equally, he refuses Baudelaire’s restriction of a modern ethos to the arena of art. Rather, Foucault hopes to invent a mode of subjectivation in which this ethos would be a practice of thought formed in direct contact with social and political realities. “Yet if we are not to settle for the affirmation or the empty dream of freedom, it seems to me that this historico-critical attitude must also be an experimental one. I mean that this work done at the limits of ourselves must, on the one hand, open up a realm of historical inquiry, and, on the other, put itself to a test of reality, of contemporary reality, both to grasp the points where change is possible and desirable, and to determine the precise form this change should take” (p. 316). The relation to the present is one that tests the limits of society, and of the self, a determination of what it is desirable and possible to change. “This philosophical attitude may be characterized as a limit-attitude. We are not talking about a gesture of rejection …. Criticism indeed consists of analyzing and reflecting upon limits. But if the Kantian question was that of knowing [savoir] what limits knowledge [connaissance] must renounce exceeding [franchir], it seems to me that the critical question today must be turned back into a positive one: In what is given to us as universal, necessary, obligatory, what place is occupied by whatever is singular, contingent, and the product of arbitrary constraints? The point, in brief, is to transform the critique conducted in the form of a necessary limitation into a practical critique that takes the form of a possible crossing-over [franchissement]” (p. 315). Such a crossing-over or “clearing-away” will always be historically specific and partial. “This means that the historical ontology of ourselves must turn away from all projects that claim to be global or radical …. I prefer the very specific transformations that have proved to be possible in the last twenty years in a certain number of areas which concern our ways of being and thinking, relations to authority, relations between the sexes, the way in which we perceive insanity or illness; I prefer even these partial transformations, which have been made in the correlation of historical analysis and the practical attitude, to the programs for a new man that the worst political systems have repeated throughout the twentieth century. I shall thus characterize the philosophical ethos appropriate to the critical ontology of ourselves as a historico-practical test of the limits we may go beyond, and thus as work carried out by ourselves upon ourselves as free beings” (p. 316). What is that work? ETHICAL WORK: CRITICAL ACTIVITY, THOUGHT EXPERIENCE. The work one performs to attempt to transform oneself into the ethical subject of one’s behavior. (What are the means by which we can change ourselves in order to become ethical subjects?)—Foucault39 What we are to do, either to moderate our acts, or to decipher what we are …. The task of ethical work for Foucault is to establish the right relationship between intellect and character in the context of practical affairs. His clearest discussion of this relationship between “thought” and “experience” is found in a version of the preface to The Uses of Pleasure, where he states that his attempt in this work had been to develop a satisfactory means to analyze sexuality as “a historically singular form of experience.” However, as he indicates elsewhere, his general remarks about sexuality apply as well to other “fundamental” experiences. Not surprisingly, he differentiated his approach from phenomenological or existential approaches based on the subject and its “primary experience.” Rather, Foucault located experience (and the subject) within a complex site comprising “a domain of knowledge [savoir], a type of normativity, and a mode of relation to the self.” Thus, he addressed experience as a historical product that emerges within a “field of knowledge [connaissance] … a collection of social rules … and a mode of relation between the individual and himself.” Foucault identified this overall project as a nominalist philosophic anthropology, explicitly rejecting any basis in pregiven essence or nature. Without rejecting the possibility that some such constants can be found, he interprets experiences, such as those of sexuality, within the particular historical fields that shaped them, to which they were in part a reaction, and which both created and limited the form those experiences could take at a given historical moment. Many analytical, political, and ethical problems could be developed from this nominalist understanding of experience, thought, and the subject. Foucault made this constellation the privileged domain of the history of thought. To do so, he provides a rich, if idiosyncratic definition of “thought”: “By ‘thought,’ I mean what establishes, in a variety of possible forms, the play of true and false, and consequently constitutes the human being as a knowing subject [connaissance] … as social and juridical subjects … and as an ethical subject.” This definition establishes a terrain for the history of thought which is far broader than the history of scientific disciplines or philosophic systems. It posits all forms of experience as potential objects of thought, and thus of the history of thought. The task of the history of thought is to identify and delimit the development and transformation of these domains of experience; as these domains and these experiences are diverse, it follows that so, too, are modes of thought. Foucault’s definition of thought as a modern practice is so broad that it comes close to equating thought not only with experience but with action. However, it is important to avoid a misunderstanding here (as in a parallel way with Foucault’s definition of power). Since thought is a defining aspect of any historically singular complex—a vital aspect of its singularity—an analysis of such complexes is always possible for a history of thought. But that does not mean that thought (or power relations, which are also an unsurpassable part of such historical singularities) is totally coextensive with the object of analysis. As Foucault put it, “The study of forms of experience can thus proceed from an analysis of ‘practices’ … as long as one qualifies that word to mean the different systems of action insofar as they are inhabited by thought.” Insofar, to the extent that, “qua”—a classic and elementary philosophic proviso that is often misunderstood today as totalization. In this light, we can make sense of Foucault’s claim that “thought is … the very form of action.” He is referring to a potential present both in the object of analysis and for the analyst. “Thought is not what inhabits a certain conduct and gives it its meaning; rather, it is what allows one to step back from this way of acting or reacting, to present it to oneself as an object of thought and to question it as to its meaning, its conditions, and its goals. Thought is freedom in relation to what one does, the motion by which one detaches oneself from it, establishes it as an object, and reflects on it as a problem.” Precisely because thought is not a given, thought is an action; and actions arising from experience and formed by thought are ethical ones. This brings us to the question of ethical work; it will have both an intellectual and a practical dimension, though, as we have just seen, experience and action arise within complex assemblages. As a thinker, the work Foucault performs “to transform himself into an ethical subject of one’s behavior” is a distinctive form of intellectual practice, a singular form of critical thought. He writes: criticism is “a historical investigation into the events that have led us to constitute ourselves and to recognize ourselves as subjects of what we are doing, thinking, saying. In that sense, this criticism is not transcendental, and its goal is not to that of making a metaphysics possible; it is genealogical in its design and archaeological in its method …. [I]t will separate out, from the contingency that has made us what we are, the possibility of no longer being, doing, or thinking what we are, do, or think … it is seeking to give new impetus, as far and as wide as possible, to the undefined work of freedom.” Such work would have multiple dimensions but, qua ethical work, it would be a disentangling and re-forming of the (power and thought) relationships within which and from which the self is shaped and takes shape. Thus, Foucault came to conceive of the most general name for the practice he was seeking to identify: “problematization.” “The proper task of a history of thought is: to define the conditions in which human beings ‘problematize’ what they are, what they do, and the world in which they live.”40 Or, again, in more philosophical language, he defines his object of analysis (and also his task) as: “the problematizations through which being [l’être] offers itself to be necessarily [pouvant et devant] thought and the practices on the basis of which these problematizations are formed.”41 It is vital to understand that, for Foucault, “being” is given through problematizations and practices; it is not prior to them. That is why it is both potentially and obligatorily—pouvant et devant—available for thought. As Foucault insisted, thought does not reside in the practices giving them their meaning; it is always a practice of freedom that could have taken (or could take in the future) a different form. Problematizations and practices can and must be thought vis-à-vis experience insofar as they concern our freedom. Ethical work makes them available in that form. In interviews with the young editors of gay journals, Foucault presents a quasi manifesto of what he sees as his own ethical task, cast as the work of thought, pleasure, and invention. In these interviews, he is especially crisp in his formulations, speaking as a member of the community. The problem for gays now, he told his young interviewers, was not to uncover the truth of homosexual desire but to make homosexuality desirable; “Sex is not a fatality; it’s a possibility for creative life” (p. 163). The search should be not for the secret of one’s identity but for how to invent new modes of relationship and a new way of life. How, that is, to become homosexual rather than affirming that one already is so. “I am not sure we should create our own culture. We have to create a culture” (p. 164). Could such a quest lead to a way of life not based on social class and other existing divisions? One that could be shared among individuals of different ages, statuses, and so on? One that could “reopen affective and relational virtualities” (p. 138) and invent “the instruments for polymorphic, varied, and individually modulated relationships” (p. 139)? He thought this was possible; what needed to be problematized was the whole tissue of sociality. What was needed was not a means of making everyone the same but of creating new modes of being together. Gays, Foucault told his interviewers, have come a long way in overcoming sexual renunciation, so perhaps they have an obligation, to themselves and to others, to invent “a homosexual ascesis,” a manner of being that today seems improbable. Ascesis is “the work that one performs on oneself in order to transform oneself or make the self appear which, happily, one never attains. Can that be our problem today?” (p. 137). To make the self a continuous creative task, a social experience? For gays, the problem might be how “to make ourselves infinitely more susceptible to pleasure [plaisirs]. We must escape and help others to escape the two readymade formulas of the pure sexual encounter and the lovers’ fusion of identities” (p. 137). Or, he asked in the same interview, “What is friendship?” His answer: “the sum of all those things through which [people] can give each other pleasure” (p. 136). A provocative answer, no doubt, but what he means by pleasure is not very well spelled out. A few things, however, can be said about his use of the term. First, he is opposing pleasure to desire, as surface to depth, as the body to the person. He is seeking to break open the equation of the forms of pleasure one enjoys and one’s supposed identity. Second, his attention to pleasure does not entail embracing the doctrine of hedonism: pleasure is neither the unique nor the highest good but, rather, an accompaniment to other activities. Foucault’s pleasure is embedded in a practice, an askēsis. One might say, it supervenes on other practices. For him, pleasure seems to function as a kind of ethical heuristic, in the sense that he suggests that where one encounters pleasures, one will be in the vicinity of experiences worthy of further reflection, experimentation, and reformulation.42 In another interview for a gay audience, Foucault insisted that gays should not privilege the model of individual rights or heterosexual marriage (that is, rights to inheritance and so on). As important as the struggles to obtain basic rights and legal protections for homosexuality were, Foucault argued, the real target was the general impoverishment of social relationships in contemporary society. Instead of treating the task as one of normalizing homosexuality in the heterosexual model, he urged his readers to try and invent something else. Such work, while arising within gay relationships, might be partially transposable to others, albeit with some imagination and tenacity. The problem, as he saw it, was to create new social forms: “We should fight against the impoverishment of the relational fabric” (p. 158). Why not imagine new practices (and eventually new forms of law) that were not restricted to individual rights but began from a premise of giving new forms to relational activities? This work is not only ethical, it is also political; but it is politics without a program. TELOS: DISASSEMBLING THE SELF. The place an action occupies in a pattern of conduct. It commits an individual … to a certain mode of being, a mode of being characteristic of the ethical subject.—Foucault43 The mode of being to which Foucault was committed is captured in his ambiguous formula “to release oneself from one self” (se déprendre de soi-même). The difficulties of finding a correct translation for the phrase indicates some of the ambiguities that surround it. A falsely literal translation would be “to untake oneself, oneself”; but not only is this phrasing alien to English (and French), but if the goal were to “untake” oneself, how exactly had one previously “taken” (prendre) oneself? What self had one taken? And who had been doing the taking? The dictionary translation of se déprendre is to “free oneself,”44 which captures the dimension of releasing oneself from a material entanglement. But “to free” obviously carries inappropriate philosophic baggage, for it implies a preexistent, essential, or true self already there to be freed. Another possibility might be “detaching oneself from one self.” Although “detachment” can suggest (as it does for the Stoics) an emotional distancing from the things of the world, in English the phrase connotes an affectless noninvolvement. And, in fact, Foucault is pointing to a certain self-distancing, and he advocated an exercise of detaching and examining parts that need to be cared for and ultimately repaired or replaced. Thus, the most adequate (or least inadequate) rendering might well be “to disassemble the self, oneself”—a phrasing that highlights the material and relational aspects of this exercise, and introduces a notion of the self as a form-giving practice that operates with and upon heterogeneous parts and forms available at a given point in history. Foucault reiterated that the goal—the mode of being—of ethics, as historically constrained, practical assembly and disassembly, when he asked: “But what then is philosophy—philosophical activity I mean—if it is not the critical work that thought brings to bear on itself? In what does it consist, if not in the endeavor to know how and to what extent it might be possible to think differently, instead of legitimating what is already known? [Thought] is entitled to explore what might be changed, through the practice of a knowledge that is foreign to it.”45Consequently, se déprendre de soi-même might be best understood as a form of continual self-bricolage. Lévi-Strauss’s classic description of the bricoleur, or “handyman,” constantly tinkering with heterogeneous objects—objects in which there was no clear distinction between concrete thought, aesthetic form-giving, and a subject’s material practice—is helpful up to a point. So, too, the bricoleur’s work on discarded and anonymous materials, reshaped and “customized” in a new way, seems apposite.46 Foucault points at such a conception when he asserts that: “I insist that this change take the form neither of a sudden illumination that makes ‘the scales fall from the eyes’ nor an openness to every movement of the time. I would like it to be an elaboration of the self by the self, a studious transformation, a slow and arduous transformation through a constant care for the truth.”47 Of course, the constant focus on the self, the care for the truth, and its reflectiveness separates Foucault’s ethics from the cultural constructions of the handyman. But if we can indicate the way in which this activity should be engaged, the question of why we should do so remains. If Foucault was stingy in his explanations of the place and meaning of the “will to truth,” he is only slightly more generous in providing material about the telos of his own thinking. There are, however, some scattered and suggestive indications. For example, he wonders, “What can the ethics of an intellectual be … if not … to render oneself permanently capable of self-detaching [se déprendre de soi-même] (which is the opposite of the attitude of conversion)? … To be at the same time an academic and an intellectual is to try to engage a type of knowledge and analysis that is taught and received in the university in a way so as to modify not only the thought of others but one’s own as well. This work of modifying one’s own thought and that of others seems to me to be the intellectual’s reason for being.”48 Elsewhere: “After all, what would the value of the passion for knowledge be if it resulted only in a certain amount of knowledgeableness and not, in one way or another, and to the extent possible, in the knower straying afield from himself?”49 The word he uses that is translated as “straying afield of oneself” is égarement.50 The Le Robert dictionary gives the primary meaning of égarement as “an action of getting a distance from what is defined as morality, reason, and the norm, and the state that ensues.” This definition has a certain resonance with Georges Canguilhem’s conception of errance, to err, to wander, to stray from the norm. For Canguilhem, as one commentator put it, “We must move, err, adapt to survive. This condition of ‘erring or drifting’ is not merely accidental or external to life but its fundamental form.”51 Norms are active states; error is a condition of truth. Disassembling the self suggests a modulated version of the second part of Lévi-Strauss’s definition of bricolage, in fact the original meaning of the word, un mouvement incident, or a swerve. This “incidental movement” originally referred to the motion of a billiard ball caroming off a cushion, or a horse swerving to avoid an unexpected obstacle. Foucault’s égarement is a slower and more meandering swerve, but nonetheless it is fair to take it as an unplanned, if reflective, avoidance or alteration of historical constituted obstacles, and as a patient disentanglement from the encumbrances of contingency. Foucault stresses the obligation to analyze historical forms that, with all their constraints and their diversity, make us what we are, and the patient labor required to reformulate them, fragment by fragment. In that work lies both the necessity and the pleasure of thought. NOTES 1 For details, see Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault, (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1991); the biography originally appeared in French in 1989. 2 Foucault has already defined these terms in great detail in two works: The Archaeology of Knowledge, (trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith [New York: Pantheon, 1972]) and The Order of Things (trans. Alan Sheridan [New York: Pantheon, 1972]), both of which preceded his nomination and election to the Collège de France. At the time of his lectures at the Collège, he was finishing “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History” (in The Foucault Reader, Rabinow, ed. [New York: Pantheon, 1984), an important statement of his understanding of these topics. 3 Foucault, “The Order of Discourse,” trans. Rupert Sawyer, appendix to The Archaeology of Knowledge (New York: Pantheon, 1972), p. 229. 4 Idem. 5 Ibid., p. 217. 6 His use of savoir and connaissance also seems to be inconsistent in this text. 7 Again, Foucault at times distinguishes between savoir and connaissance but he seems not to do so with any great consistency. 8 Foucault, “Two Lectures,” in Colin Gordon, ed., Power/Knowledge (New York: Pantheon, 1972),. p. 78. 9 Ibid., p. 91. 10 Idem. The English translation has “repression,” but that is a confusion. 11 Ibid., p. 92. 12 The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction (New York: Pantheon, 1978), p. 7. 13 Ibid., p. 159. 14 In a 1978 lecture, Foucault emphatically stated that these technologies did not simply replace one another, as one epoch supersedes another: “We need to see things not in terms of the replacement of a society of sovereignty by a disciplinary society by a society of governmentality, in reality one has a triangle, sovereignty-discipline-governmentality.” Foucault, “Governmentality,” in The Foucault Effect: Studies in Governmentality, Burchall, Gordon, Miller, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), p. 102. 15 Foucault, “Pour une morale de l’inconfort,” in Dits et écrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), vol. 3, p. 784. 16 Idem. 17 Ibid., p. 787. 18 Foucault, “Des Travaux,” in Dits et écrits, vol. 4, p. 367. 19 “Pour une Morale,” p. 786. 20 Idem. 21 Foucault, “Iran: The Spirit of a World without Spirit,” in Michel Foucault: Politics, Philosophy, Culture, Lawrence Kritzman, ed. (New York and London: Routledge, 1988), p. 214. 22 Ibid., p. 218. 23 Foucault, “A quoi rêvent les Iraniens?” in Dits et écrits, vol. 3, p. 694. 24 Cf. Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault et ses contemporains (Paris: 1995). 25 The History of Sexuality, vol. 2: The Uses of Pleasure (New York: Pantheon, 1985), p. 29. 26 Ibid., p. 28. 27 “Le retour de la morale,” in Dits et écrits, vol. 4, p. 698. 28 The History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 26. 29 “Nietzsche, Genealogy, History,” p. 162. 30 Ibid., p. 164. 31 “The Order of Discourse,” p. 218. 32 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. x. 33 Ibid., p. 8. 34 Ibid., p. 9. 35 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage, 1974), pp. 281–82. 36 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 27. 37 Gilles Deleuze makes a point in many ways similar to this in Foucault (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota, 1988), pp. 94–123. 38 The term transgression appears only twice in all of Dits et écrits, vol. 4, and then only as historical examples. 39 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 27. 40 Ibid., p. 10. 41 Ibid., p. 11. 42 I would like to thank James Faubion for the notion of an “ethical heuristic.” 43 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 28. 44 Harrap’s New Collegiate French and English Dictionary (London: Harraps, 1982). 45 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 9. 46 I would like to thank Robert Hurley for suggesting “customize” as a helpful gloss. 47 Foucault, “The Concern for Truth” in Foucault Live (New York: Semiotext(e), 1996), p. 461. 48 Idem. 49 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 8. 50 I would like to thank Arpad Szakoloczai for bringing this word to my attention. 51 François Delaporte, ed., A Vital Rationalist: Selected Writings from Georges Canguilhem (New York: Zone Books, 1994), pp. 20–21.

=== END FOUCAULT ===

=== BORGES LIBRARY OF BABEL (FULL) ===
Author: Steven L. Peck
Title: A Short Stay in Hell
Chapter: 9
Words: 5599

FULL CONTENT:
1 THE BEGINNING UPON LEAVING THE DEMON, I was disoriented and could only tell I was in an immense, spacious building. Strangely, to my surprise and despite my terror, confusion, and fear, I felt better than I had for years. Before my death I had suffered terribly, but I noticed quickly I was now in perfect health. I stared at my hands. My wedding ring was gone. The scars and age spots had disappeared, leaving only the scattered freckles from my sunny youth. I touched my front teeth, surprised that those lost so long ago in a head-on collision with a drunk driver had been replaced and the once jagged row of my staggering bottom teeth was straight. I suppose I was also surprised I had a body at all. As a Mormon I believed I would eventually get a perfect body after the resurrection, but immediately after death I was supposed to go to a spirit world. It was clear this was not what had happened. Feeling lost and confused, I was overwhelmed with a desire to pray, as I had so often during my mortal earth life. While alive, I often knelt in prayer and asked for blessings and sought direction from the Lord. As then, I dropped to my knees and began to pray, but I was overwhelmed with doubt and fear. Could I pray in Hell? Could I pray my way out of Hell? Who was I praying to now? The God I believed in was a kind, wise Heavenly Father who loved me and sent His son to redeem me. He had an eternal plan, which would end in my deification if I lived according to the commandments and obtained the proper ordinances here in this life. I was supposed to go to a spirit world to share the gospel with other dead spirits until the resurrection. I would then go to the Celestial Kingdom and live with my wife forever – becoming a God like my Heavenly Father and continuing His work of redeeming the uncreated intelligences that filled the universe. This Hell did not fit anywhere in my belief system. I began to cry. I bawled like a baby – tears falling onto the white smock. I prayed, but all the while I was shrouded in blind confusion. I knew nothing about Zoroastrianism. I missed my wife and children. I missed the familiar trappings of my home, my work, and my routines. Questions plagued me. Was I supposed to pray? The demon said God was called Ahura Mazda. Was he kind and loving? What was his nature? Was it even a he, like the God I’d worshiped all my life as a Mormon? Could it be a Goddess? I had no way to know. How do you pray if you don’t know what God is like? Maybe God was a demon – that would explain much of the misery of earth life. Would prayer do any good? I could not tell. Suddenly, no more than a few minutes after I had arrived, or so it felt to me, the lights went out, and in the dark I wept until I slept. At six a.m. – and I knew it was six o’clock because there was a large (almost two meters in diameter) round clock near me on the wall, like a giant version of the kind that hung above my elementary school teacher’s desk, and underneath it was a digital readout that said, “Year 0000000, Day 2” – the lights came on as quickly as they had gone out the night before. I surveyed my surroundings carefully for the first time. I was in a long corridor about twelve feet wide. Running along one side of the hall was a thick metal pipe–like railing about four feet high, intended, no doubt, to keep me from falling into a fearsome chasm. The railing was painted a soft brownish red and fashioned with rounded corners and turns like the low fences that front the wire cages at the zoo. It extended down the endless hall until it disappeared in a vanishing point, almost as if I were looking into parallel facing mirrors that give the illusion they go on and on forever. Looking across the railing to the other side of the chasm, which seemed as bottomless as the corridor seemed long, I could see I was on an upper floor of a vast building. The floors on the other side of the chasm looked like a series of matching floors to the one on which I stood. The floors across the hundred-foot span extended upward and downward as far as the eye could see. On every floor were rows upon rows of books. Millions of them (you will see soon what a terrible underestimate this is). It struck me as nothing so much as a prison block with books arranged on shelves on each floor rather than jail cells. The floor was carpeted with the drab, gray, highly functional carpet that seems ubiquitous in public buildings. People were scattered everywhere on both sides of the abyss, some standing, staring blankly, others walking in a daze, some weeping uncontrollably, some kneeling in desperate prayer as I had done last night. Everyone looked as stunned and frightened as I felt. No one looked interested in talking, and everyone seemed as preoccupied as I was with trying to understand this strange afterlife into which we had unexpectedly been tossed. I turned back to investigate my surroundings. In the vicinity of where I slept, I found a break in the shelves of books. Looking over the rail to the other side, where I had a panoramic view of this strange building, I could see that such breaks in the rows of books occurred about every three hundred yards or so on each floor. The breaks were identical: on each one there was a round clock with large black hands and a digital date readout in the center of the clock-face. In front of every clock in the hallway was a small kiosk near the railing. Next to the clock was a sign with a set of rules and advice. There was also an open entrance into a small room. I peered into the closest and found it led to a small chamber furnished with seven neatly made beds, the frame being constructed of the same metal that fashioned the railing. On each bed was a mattress, fitted sheets, pillow, a blanket, and a smock identical to the one I was wearing. There was also a drinking fountain near the entrance. Attached to the little bedroom was a spacious bathroom with a shower, sink, and a generous full-length mirror on the wall opposite the sink. There were no necessities like toothbrushes or razors of any kind; however, there was toilet paper, tissue, and soap in a pump bottle. Somehow I had always assumed going to the bathroom was something of such an earthly nature that it would be unnecessary in the afterlife. There were to be many surprises. I looked in the mirror and discovered not the gaunt, forty-five-year-old dying-of-cancer me that stared back from the glass the last time I looked at my reflection, but a fit version of my twenty-five-year-old self. My body was sleek and well muscled, with my hair neatly cut and parted down the middle as I’d always worn it. My teeth were white and straighter than I’d imagined was possible. For a brief second I had a light-hearted feeling of satisfaction. I had been resurrected, as I’d always believed in my religion. I flexed my muscles and stood admiring my flawless grin, greatly pleased by how healthy I felt. Thinking that my resurrected body would be indestructible, as my Mormon beliefs held, I tried to scratch myself. I was disappointed that without difficulty I drew blood. And it hurt. This was not the type of afterlife I had always envisioned. Not by a long shot. A man came into the bathroom and saw me preening before my newly fit reflection. He turned around with a quick “Sorry!” and left me alone to my marveling. I went back to the corridor to look at the sign placed next to the clock. The letters were large and black, printed on a reflective background – like the surface of a speed-limit sign. This is what it said: Welcome to Hell. This Hell is based upon a short story by Jorge Luis Borges from your world called “The Library of Babel.” Here you will find all the books that can possibly be written. When you are ready to leave, find the book describing your earthly life story (without errors, e.g., in spelling, grammar, etc.) and submit the story through the slot below this sign. If the story is accepted, you will be admitted into a glorious heaven filled with wonders and joys beyond your imagination. During your stay you may be interested in reading a book on Zoroastrianism. By special arrangement, there is one on every floor. The other books are randomized. The food kiosk will provide whatever you would like to eat. Just ask for it. We would ask that you please follow a few simple rules during your stay in Hell: 1. Please be kind. Treat others as you would like to be treated. Failure to do this will bring unhappiness and misery to you and your fellow citizens. 2. Do not get discouraged. Remember nothing lasts forever. Someday this will be a distant memory. 3. Please leave towels on the floor if you wish them to be cleaned. Hang up those you wish to use again. 4. Books not in your possession will be returned to their original place on the stacks every night. A book will be considered in your possession if you are touching it. 5. If you are killed you will be restored to life on the following day. Please try to avoid death as much as possible. 6. All contracts, bonds, commitments, covenants, pledges, and promises entered into prior to your entering Hell are null and void. This includes, but is not limited to: debt, marriage, natural births and adoptions, requirements of citizenship, military obligations, student loans, etc. 7. Remember you are never really alone. Although it may feel like it for very long stretches of time. 8. Please don’t write on, mark, or mar library materials. Although repairs are made nightly, we would like to keep repairs to a minimum. 9. Lastly, you are here to learn something. Don’t try to figure out what it is. This can be frustrating and unproductive. We hope you enjoy your stay here. We have done all we can to make your stay a pleasant and instructive one. I stared at the rules a long time. Especially number six. As a Mormon, I had always believed I was married for eternity, but now my wife was gone? Was she here somewhere? Were my children missing me? Was everyone here who had ever lived? No. I remembered the demon tapping away on his handheld device, seemingly to send people to a variety of Hells. Still, all I had believed in during my life appeared to be mistaken. Gone just like that. All my hopes. All my prayers. It was all wrong. I remembered what little I had read about Zoroastrianism: Iranian, started in approximately 600 BC. I found I could recall every detail of my life; every event ever experienced I could remember with perfect clarity. I could remember every word on every page I’d ever read. Every conversation. Every tax form I’d ever filled out. I could reconstruct every second of every day I’d been alive from the moment of my birth until the day I finally shut my eyes at the end. This clarity of memory surprised me the first time I tried reviewing the past, but it was all there. (This was to be the greatest curse of Hell. Sometimes I would replay my entire life again and again for thousands of years. Remembering all the things I could have done differently, all the things … no. I won’t go there now. I must tell this story.) The first few days were ones of discovery. Everyone just sort of nodded to one another; I think we were all disoriented and confused. It was not until about two p.m. on the second day that I noticed I felt hungry. I had seen someone using the food kiosk earlier. The man had just walked up and said, “Roast beef sandwich,” and one appeared on the tray before him. I decided to be more specific. “A roast beef sandwich, with provolone cheese, Dijon mustard, lettuce, tomato, and mayonnaise on rye bread.” Much to my surprise, exactly what I asked for appeared. “Could I get a diet Coke, too?” It appeared likewise and looked and tasted like a diet Coke. “And how about a vanilla shake?” As an afterthought I added, “Like the kind at the Purple Aardvark on Second South in Mountain Grove, Utah.” It came. Just like I remembered it. The taste, texture, and presentation – including being served upside down in a bowl – it was all the same. There were no tables, so I sat on the floor under the railing, dangling my feet over the edge and staring at the rows and rows of floors on the other side of the abyss. Across the chasm, people were also reading the rules, wandering around, and, just as we were, starting small conversations. Some were using the kiosk and eating. “Mind if I join you?” The speaker was a young man – but then so was I. That thought cheered me. He was wearing the same cotton robe we all wore, thick with wide sleeves that fell to about the forearm, with a hole cut out at the top wide enough to expose the bottom of our necks. It hung loosely and modestly to about mid-calf. Our feet were bare. The temperature seemed pleasant – not too cold or too hot. I motioned to the floor and he plopped down beside me. We dangled our legs over the edge, our arms resting on the railing. He was eating an apple and had a can of V8 Juice. “Strange Hell,” he said, motioning to the people on the other side of the chasm. “Not what I expected,” I agreed. “Not Zoroastrian either then?” “Mormon.” “Ah. I was agnostic, so of course I wasn’t thinking of this as the final ending,” he said, waving his arm around randomly. “You from Utah?” “Yeah. You?” “I’m from Santa Rosa, California.” “Never been there.” We sat silently for a few minutes, eating our lunches thoughtfully. I think at the time we were still taking it all in. He drained his can and tossed it down into the bottomless space separating us from the floors on the other side. We both watched it fall until it grew so small it disappeared. We both held our breath waiting for some sound of it hitting the bottom. It never came. “Deep hole,” he said conversationally. “I wonder how far down to the bottom?” I said, inclining my head downward. He shrugged, shaking his. “I can’t imagine. What did you think of the rules?” he asked, taking another bite of his apple. “Not very informative. Seemed simple enough. I wonder what happens if you don’t follow them? I mean it says if we aren’t kind to each other we’ll have a miserable time of it. Is that because we’re punished in some way?” The man looked at me, somewhat frightened. He finally asked if I’d seen the lake of fire and brimstone. I told him what our demon had said about them all being actors. “What a strange place. Well, I can tell you one thing. I’m getting out of here as soon as possible. I’m going to find my book and get it in that slot in two shakes of a lamb’s tail,” he said determinedly. “I’m not going to stay in this place for twenty years before starting and then spend another twenty looking for it.” I nodded and said I would be doing the same. Spending twenty years looking for a book did not sound pleasant. What if it stretched to fifty or even a hundred years? I wondered. Looking around at the size of this library it would not be hard to imagine that there were more than a million books lining the shelves that stretched up, down, and side to side as far as the eye could see. We talked most of the afternoon. I told him about my death. He told me about his. He died of a heart attack at age ninety-three in his sleep. It sounded like a pleasant way to die. “Of course, I was a little surprised to find myself sitting in a room with a demon and watching a scene from Dante’s Inferno. I’m still a little surprised to find myself here. But it’s all so real. There’s a sense of actuality that I just can’t dismiss. I’m fairly pleased to find myself so young and strong again. If only Sally could see me now. Wouldn’t she get a kick out of this? My, what a strange universe we live in.” About this time we noticed a young lady standing by the kiosk next to us who seemed to be waiting for a chance to ask us something. “Hello,” my companion said simply. She looked sad and lost. And seemed near enough to tears not to be able to hold them back much longer. “Are we in Hell?” She shuddered. We both stood up awkwardly. I looked at my companion and he looked at me. He spoke first. “We think so.” With that, she let go and sobbed bitterly into her hands. I looked at my companion, and tears were running down his face. It took me a minute to realize I was crying too. She looked up and soon we found ourselves in a group hug bawling furiously. We looked at one another, all strangers, all lost and alone, and the absurdity of our situation struck us. We all suddenly burst into an awkward laughter that just as quickly melted into sobs again. It took some time, but we eventually gathered a measure of composure. I ran into the nearby bathroom and grabbed some toilet paper and passed it around to our small troop. We introduced ourselves. I learned my companion’s name was Elliott Callington. The woman was named Larisa Sims. She had died of breast cancer at age fifty-four. It seemed odd, standing there in Hell, but understanding how we each had died seemed the most important thing about us. I see now, however, that it was only because it was the freshest thing on our minds – and something we had worried about all our lives in one way or another. Now it was over. We were dead. And now we were in Hell. We three talked until the lights went out again. The only light visible was a faint greenish glow coming out of the room with the beds. The source of the light turned out to be a dimly lit exit sign facing into the room. Inside the room was dark, but each of us felt or maneuvered our way to one of the beds. Last time I’d looked at the clock it was about 9:45, so I supposed it was about 10:00 when the lights went out. I lay there a while, but could not sleep. How strange it all was. I decided to try to see if I could get a glass of warm milk to help me sleep. I felt my way to the kiosk and said, “Warm milk, please,” but nothing happened. I tried a couple of times, but apparently the machines only worked when the lights were on. As I made my way back to the bed, Larisa asked if I had tried the kiosk just now. I replied in the affirmative, explained my failure to get some milk, and then climbed into bed. Other than the breathing of my companions, I was stunned by the stillness. I’d spent the last month in a hospital and was used to commotion, ticks, hums, beeps, and the hush-swish of air-conditioning systems going on and off, nurses coming in and out at all times of night. Here in Hell it was absolutely still. Not even the whisper of any air movement. The stillness of the grave? I shuddered and curled up into my blanket. The mattress was firm and comfortable, and I soon drifted into a deep, dreamless sleep. ~~~ I AWOKE WHEN the light came on. Elliott was first to the bathroom, and I could hear the shower running. Larisa was still asleep. I drank from the drinking fountain and walked outside and asked for a glass of cold orange juice. I leaned over the railing and drank my juice, looking deep into the crevasse between the floors bracketing our side and the other opposite. I don’t think I’d ever seen anything so deep. Not even the Grand Canyon had seemed so vast. After a few minutes, Larisa joined me in staring over the side. “I used to be afraid of heights. But this looks even beyond my fear. It looks like it goes on forever,” she remarked. “Maybe it does.” (I was wrong of course. It does end. There is a bottom. But “forever” would have been a better word. “Forever and ever” would hardly have described it. “Infinity” is even too small a word to describe the vastness of the distance to the bottom. But I’ve stood upon the bottom floor. The human mind cannot comprehend what it took to reach, but I’ve been there.) For the first time since our arrival, Larissa and I walked over to the shelves of books and pulled one down. Each volume appeared to be identical on the outside. They were bound in light brown high-quality calfskin. The edges were gilded in bright gold, and the paper was a thick heavy bond – substantial and bright white, fibrous, and nicely stitched into the binding. Each page was a solid block of text. An ordinary book by all appearances – except the text was complete gibberish. A random splash of capital and lowercase characters, punctuation marks, and other characters like &, *, $, and #. Here is a line from the first page of the first book I picked up: Aj;kLJjppOjnfe7 ImNB2uyS@;jHnMBVF ghT/.hk%hKh’2jh< ,bYblZl@)m $’n@gD E#zB /,,]hqH Every page had a similar look. “These books are nothing but garbage,” Larisa said in a disgusted voice. “When I was looking at these, I was thinking about a lifetime spent reading great works of literature. Now I get it – this is Hell; an eternity surrounded by books, but they’re all nonsense.” She gave a sarcastic laugh and heaved the book over the railing. A man wandered over to us. “I see you’ve discovered the quality of our library.” “I can’t believe it,” I said, picking up another volume and staring at the textual salad of symbols. “My name is Bob, but my friends all called me Biscuit.” “How do you do … Biscuit?” I continued to pull books off the shelf and flip through them. I was having a hard time believing all of the books were just collections of random characters. The man calling himself Biscuit seemed mildly amused. I was pulling them off the shelf, paging rapidly through them and then, like Larisa, tossing them over the side. More people joined us, and soon a fair number of us were looking through books and tossing them over the side, most of them making the same sorts of comments. “I can’t believe it. Such nice books, and every one of them filled with nonsense.” “This isn’t right! Is it?” “This is Hell. This really is Hell.” One woman was laughing hysterically and just tossing books over the side. She wasn’t even looking at them. I have to admit I found a certain strange pleasure in heaving books over the side. It was a feeling akin to popping bubble-wrap. Taking a book of nonsense, tossing it over the rail, and watching it until it disappeared flapping wildly into the oblivion below gave me a strange satisfaction, a small sense of purpose. Only Biscuit refrained from helping the general effort to clean the shelves. He just sat there smiling, shaking his head. “I see,” he said to no one in particular. “We really are in the Library of Babel.” A woman standing next to me, watching our books fall like a pair of wounded ducks spiraling to the ground, inquired politely, “The Library of Babel?” “This is the Library of Babel,” he shouted. “We’re in it. Not like Borges described it, but this is it, the same idea.” Several people turned their attention to Biscuit, including me. “What’s the library of Babel?” another man asked, repeating the woman’s question. “Don’t you see?” Biscuit was fairly animated, and most of the people who had been launching books into the chasm had turned to listen to him. “It’s written on the sign with the rules outside the rest areas. It says this Hell is based on a story by Borges. I remember the story. Look, the books all end on page four hundred ten, just like the books in his story. And look at this. They’re all in blocks of” – here he started counting – “yes, forty lines, and I’ll bet there are” – he started counting again – “yes. Eighty characters per line, just as Borges described. Amazing. We’re in the Library of Babel.” Someone asked a third time, a little more impatiently than the first two inquiries, “What’s the Library of Babel?” Biscuit looked around him and saw that an audience of about fifty people now gave him its undivided attention. “Well,” he began in a lecturesome tone, “imagine a library that contains not just every book that has been written, but every book that could be written. I remember the story exactly. How strange. But the basic idea from Borges’s story is that the library contains every possible book. So somewhere in here is a book of all A’s, a book of all periods, or a book of semicolons, or B’s. Any letter. There’s a book that alternates A’s and B’s for its entire length, but most books are just a random collection of symbols.” “So there’s a book that’s half A’s and in the second half all B’s,” proposed one woman. “Yes. But more than that, every book ever written is there. And every book ever written is there backwards.” One man raised his hand like a student in a classroom, and Biscuit acknowledged him. “It can’t have every book,” the man said, tilting his head and looking ridiculous as he affected a knowing and wise demeanor. “Some books are longer than four hundred ten pages. Take War and Peace, for example.” He looked around, nodding his head trying to find someone to acknowledge his point. “No. Don’t you see?” Biscuit said. “War and Peace would be in multiple volumes.” “With blank pages after it ended, completing the last volume,” added the woman standing next to me. “Or with the life story of Leo Tolstoy at the end,” added another woman. “Both,” said Biscuit. “There’s even one with the history of Leo Tolstoy’s nose hair completing the volume. But most are going to be pure and utter nonsense – random characters, with no order. Mostly nonsense.” “So there’s a version of War and Peace with the main character named Fred instead of Pierre,” said a man to no one in particular. “And another where Mark Twain and Huck Finn join the war against Napoleon,” added another woman. “But mostly nonsense,” Biscuit added again softly. Everyone was silent a moment. “That’s what the sign out front means,” the speaker was my new friend Elliott. “We have to find our own life story to get out of here.” “In one or two volumes,” asked a man in despair, “or ten or twelve?” Biscuit continued almost to himself, “There’s a second-by-second account of our lives, probably in multiple volumes, a minute-by-minute account, an hour-by-hour, a day-by-day. There’s one that covers the events of our lives as viewed by our mothers, one by our fathers, one by our neighbors, one by our dogs. There must be thousands of our biographies here. Which one do they want, I wonder?” Everyone seemed stunned, thinking about the different volumes in the library. “You mean there’s a biography of everything and everyone in this library. There’s even a biography of the guppies in my fish tank?” “Yes. Anything that can be written is there. The history of your big toe as viewed from the perspective of your shoe is there. Anything you can imagine, anything you can picture being written is here is this library.” Biscuit seemed to be astonishing even himself. “It must have billions and billions of books,” one woman said. “If there’s a biography for anyone who’s ever lived, and every guppy that ever lived, and every worm that ever lived, there must be billions and billions of books.” “Wouldn’t it be infinite?” said another man shakily. “I’m not sure. I don’t think so,” Biscuit said slowly. “If we have four hundred and ten pages, forty lines of eighty characters, and a finite number of characters, there’s a finite number of books I would think. But it’s large. Very large.” We were all silent at the thought of the task before us. In this library of mostly meaningless books there was a book that described our life story. We had to find that one book. It could take millions of years, I thought. (Millions of years. Ha!) Most of the people had lost interest in opening the books and had begun conversations in small groups. I fell in with Biscuit and a woman named Dolores. Biscuit had lived most of his life as a homeless schizophrenic. He earned the name Biscuit when he refused to give up two dinner rolls to a couple of policeman arresting him. He told them, “These are the brain and heart of the world. Were I to give them up, the world would die and waste away.” He spent his life believing the world was dying, because one of his cellmates had eaten them while he was asleep. Dolores had been a housewife married to a factory worker in Detroit. She raised four children and then opened a ceramics shop after they had grown and left home. Her life had been rich and happy. She died at her daughter’s house surrounded by those she loved. In both stories of my companions, their young looks contrasted with their sagacity and age. I had died young and never really felt I had matured. I remember my own father, a real man of the house, someone who knew what it was to be a man. He radiated confidence. I never felt like that. I felt as if I were an imposter all the time I was raising my kids. I felt lost and helpless. I was flying by the seat of my pants, always with a feeling I was not doing things right. Compared to my own father, I seemed completely clueless. My dad was still living when I died. I hope he ends up in a nice Hell. A nice Hell. I laughed at the thought. This wasn’t a bad place. It seemed like a tedious Hell, but there was plenty to eat, good company, and it sounded like after a while we would eventually get out. We three went off to a nearby kiosk. I found Elliott and Larisa there and introduced everyone. “I guess we’ve got our work cut out for us,” Elliott observed positively. “It’s too bad we’re starting the search in the middle. Maybe we should find where the library ends. You know, start at the beginning.” “It’s not a bad idea,” Biscuit said, “at least we wouldn’t accidently redo a floor or something.” Larisa smiled. “I’m still not convinced there’s not an infinity of books. How can there be a limit to the number of books that can be written?” Dolores and Elliott nodded in agreement. (I’ll have to admit I was a little skeptical myself, but as you’ll see, I eventually met someone who had calculated the number of books in the library. There is a finite number.) The clock was moving toward ten p.m., and I thought the lights would probably go out soon. I went over and ordered warm milk, and it appeared, piping hot, the way I like it. I chose the same bedroom and the same bed I had slept in the night before. My two friends did the same. No one else came in with us, and we had the room to ourselves. What creatures of habit we are. After only a few nights in Hell we had settled into a comfortable routine. As I drank my milk, the lights went out and that utter stillness returned. My thoughts were restless now, and I was in no mood for sleep. How far was it to the end of the hallway in which we lived? Was it further than a mile? What if it were a hundred miles? How many books would that be? What if it were a thousand? It wasn’t that far, surely.

=== END BABEL ===

=== KLEIN SHOCK DOCTRINE (FULL) ===
Author: Naomi Klein
Title: The Shock Doctrine
Chapter: 37
Words: 11822

FULL CONTENT:
23. International Monetary Fund, “Article I—Purposes,” Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund, www.imf.org. 24. “Speech by Lord Keynes in Moving to Accept the Final Act at the Closing Plenary Session, Bretton Woods, 22 July, 1944,” Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, vol. 26, ed. Donald Moggridge (London: Macmillan, 1980), 103. 25. John Williamson, “In Search of a Manual for Technopols,” in John Williamson, ed., The Political Economy of Policy Reform (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994), 18. 26. “Appendix: The Washington Consensus,’” in The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 27. 27. Williamson, The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 17. 28. Joseph E. Stiglitz, Globalization and Its Discontents (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2002), 13. 29. Davison L. Budhoo, Enough Is Enough: Dear Mr. Camdessus … Open Letter of Resignation to the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, foreword by Errol K. McLeod (New York: New Horizons Press, 1990), 102. 30. Dani Rodrik, “The Rush to Free Trade in the Developing World: Why So Late? Why Now? Will It Last?” in Voting for Reform: Democracy, Political Liberalization and Economic Adjustment, ed. Stephan Haggard and Steven B. Webb (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), 82. Emphasis added. 31. Ibid., 81. 32. “… [W]hatever the merits of trade reform, the causal link drawn between trade regimes and propensity to macroeconomic crisis was bad economics.” Dani Rodrik, “The Limits of Trade Policy Reform in Developing Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 6, no. 1 (Winter 1992): 95. 33. Herasto Reyes, “Argentina: historia de una crisis,” La Prensa (Panama City), January 12, 2002. 34. Nathaniel C. Nash, “Turmoil, Then Hope in Argentina,” New York Times, January 31, 1991. 35. “Interview with Arnold Harberger.” 36. José Natanson, Buenos muchachos: Vida y obra de los economistas del establishment (Buenos Aires: Libros del Zorzal, 2004). 37. Paul Blustein, And the Money Kept Rolling In (and Out): Wall Street, the IMF, and the Bankrupting of Argentina (New York: PublicAffairs, 2005), 21. 38. Ibid., 24; interview with Domingo Cavallo conducted January 30, 2002, for Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy, www.pbs.org; César V. Herrera and Marcelo García, “A 10 años de la privatización de YPF—Análisis y consecuencias en la Argentina y en la Cuenca del Golfo San Jorge (versión ampliada),” Centro Regional de Estudios Económicos de la Patagonia Central, January 23, 2003, www.creepace.com.ar; Antonio Camou, “Saber técnico y política en los orígenes del menemismo,” Perfiles Latinoamericanos 7, no. 12 (June 1998); Carlos Saúl Menem, speech given during a lunch with Mexican president Ernesto Zedillo, November 26, 1997, zedillo.presidencia.gob.mx. FOOTNOTE: Interview with Alejandro Olmos Gaona, “Las deudas hay que pagarlas, las estafas no,” LaVaca, January 10, 2006, www.lavaca.org. 39. “Menem’s Miracle,” Time International, July 13, 1992. 40. Cavallo, Commanding Heights. 9. Slamming the Door on History: A Crisis in Poland, a Massacre in China 1. Leszek Balcerowicz, “Losing Milton Friedman, A Revolutionary Muse of Liberty,” Daily Star (Beirut), November 22, 2006. 2. Michael Freedman, “The Radical,” Forbes, February 13, 2006. 3. Joseph Fewsmith, China Since Tiananmen: The Politics of Transition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 35. 4. The embryo of Solidarity was a semi-independent union called Free Labour Unions of the Coast, formed in 1978. This was the group that organized the strikes that eventually led to the creation of Solidarity. 5. Thomas A. Sancton, “He Dared to Hope,” Time, January 4, 1982. 6. Ibid. 7. “Solidarity’s Programme Adopted by the First National Congress,” in Peter Raina, Poland 1981: Towards Social Renewal (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1985), 326–80. 8. Sancton, “He Dared to Hope.” 9. Egil Aarvik, “The Nobel Peace Prize 1983 Presentation Speech,” Oslo, Norway, December 10, 1983, www.nobelprize.org. 10. Lawrence Weschler, “A Grand Experiment,” The New Yorker, November 13, 1989. 11. Jeffrey D. Sachs, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time (New York: Penguin, 2005), 120; Magdalena Wyganowska, “Transformation of the Polish Agricultural Sector and the Role of the Donor Community,” USAID Mission to Poland, September 1998, www.usaid.gov. 12. James Risen, “Cowboy of Poland’s Economy,” Los Angeles Times, February 9, 1990. 13. Sachs, The End of Poverty, 111. 14. Weschler, “A Grand Experiment.” 15. Sachs, The End of Poverty, 114. 16. Ibid.; Weschler, “A Grand Experiment.” 17. Interview with Jeffrey Sachs conducted June 15, 2000, for Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy, www.pbs.org. 18. Przemyslaw Wielgosz, “25 Years of Solidarity,” unpublished lecture, August 2005. Courtesy of the author. 19. Sachs, The End of Poverty, 117. FOOTNOTE: Randy Boyagoda, “Europe’s Original Sin,” The Walrus, February 2007, www.walrusmagazine.com. 20. Weschler, “A Grand Experiment”; Interview with Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada conducted March 20, 2001, for Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy, www.pbs.org. 21. Weschler, “A Grand Experiment.” 22. Balcerowicz, “Losing Milton Friedman.” 23. “Walesa: U.S. Has Stake in Poland’s Success,” United Press International, August 25, 1989. 24. The quotation is from Zofia Kuratowska, “Solidarity’s foremost expert on health services and now a leading legislator.” Weschler, “A Grand Experiment.” 25. John Tagliabue, “Poles Approve Solidarity-Led Cabinet,” New York Times, September 13, 1989. 26. Weschler, “A Grand Experiment”; “Mazowiecki Taken Ill in Parliament,” Guardian Weekly (London), September 17, 1989. 27. Anne Applebaum, “Exhausted Polish PM’s Cabinet Is Acclaimed,” Independent (London), September 13, 1989. 28. Weschler, “A Grand Experiment.” 29. Ibid. 30. Leszek Balcerowicz, “Poland,” in The Political Economy of Policy Reform, ed. John Williamson (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994), 177. 31. Ibid., 176–77. 32. Ibid., 163. 33. Thomas Carothers, “The End of the Transition Paradigm,” Journal of Democracy 13, no. 1 (January 2002): 6–7. 34. George J. Church, “The Education of Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev,” Time, January 4, 1988. 35. Francis Fukuyama, “The End of History?” The National Interest, Summer 1989. FOOTNOTE: Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York: Free Press, 1992). 36. Milton Friedman and Rose D. Friedman, Two Lucky People: Memoirs (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 603. 37. Fukuyama, “The End of History?” 38. Ibid. 39. Friedman and Friedman, Two Lucky People, 520–22. 40. Ibid., 558; Milton Friedman, “If Only the United States Were as Free as Hong Kong,” Wall Street Journal, July 8, 1997. 41. Maurice Meisner, The Deng Xiaoping Era: An Inquiry into the Fate of Chinese Socialism, 1978–1994 (New York: Hill and Wang, 1996), 455; “Deng’s June 9 Speech: ‘We Face a Rebellious Clique’ and ‘Dregs of Society,’” New York Times, June 30, 1989. 42. Friedman had been invited to China in various capacities—as a conference participant, a university lecturer—but in his memoirs he characterized it as a state visit: “I was mostly the guest of governmental entities,” Friedman writes. Friedman and Friedman, Two Lucky People, 601. 43. Ibid., 517, 537, 609. Emphasis in original. 44. Ibid., 601–602. 45. Wang Hui, China’s New Order: Society, Politics, and Economy in Transition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003), 45, 54. 46. Ibid., 54. 47. Ibid., 57. 48. Meisner, The Deng Xiaoping Era, 463–65. 49. “China’s Harsh Actions Threaten to Set Back 10-Year Reform Drive,” Wall Street Journal, June 5, 1989. 50. “Deng’s June 9 Speech: ‘We Face a Rebellious Clique’ and ‘Dregs of Society.’” FOOTNOTE: Henry Kissinger, “The Caricature of Deng as a Tyrant Is Unfair,” Washington Post, August 1, 1989. 51. Interview with Orville Schell conducted on December 13, 2005, for PBS’s Frontline episode “The Tank Man”; full interview transcript available at www.pbs.org. 52. Wang, China’s New Order, 65–66. 53. Meisner, The Deng Xiaoping Era, 482. FOOTNOTE: David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 135. 54. Mo Ming, “90 Percent of China’s Billionaires Are Children of Senior Officials,” China Digital Times, November 2, 2006, www.chinadigitaltimes.net. 55. Human Rights Watch, “Race to the Bottom: Corporate Complicity in Chinese Internet Censorship,” Human Rights Watch 18, no. 8(c) (August 2006): 28, 43; Wang, China’s New Order, 65. 56. Friedman and Friedman, Two Lucky People, 516. 57. Jaroslaw Urbanski, “Workers in Poland After 1989,” Workers Initiative Poland, paspartoo.w.interia.pl; Weschler, “A Grand Experiment.” 58. Mark Kramer, “Polish Workers and the Post-Communist Transition, 1989–93,” Europe-Asia Studies, June 1995; World Bank, World Development Indicators 2006, www.worldbank.org; Andrew Curry, “The Case against Poland’s New President,” New Republic, November 17, 2005; Wielgosz, “25 Years of Solidarity.” 59. Wielgosz, “25 Years of Solidarity.” 60. David Ost, The Defeat of Solidarity: Anger and Politics in Postcommunist Europe (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005), 62. 61. Statistical Yearly (Warsaw: Polish Main Statistical Office, 1997), 139. 62. Kramer, “Polish Workers and the Post-Communist Transition, 1989–93.” 10. Democracy Born in Chains: South Africa’s Constricted Freedom 1. “South Africa; Tutu Says Poverty, Aids Could Destabilise Nation,” AllAfrica.com, November 2001. 2. Martin J. Murray, The Revolution Deferred (London: Verso, 1994), 12. 3. “ANC Leader Affirms Support for State Control of Industry,” Times (London), January 26, 1990. 4. Ismail Vadi, The Congress of the People and Freedom Charter Campaign, foreword by Walter Sisulu (New Delhi: Sterling Publishers, 1995), www.sahistory.org.za. 5. Nelson Mandela, A Long Walk to Freedom: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 1994), 150. 6. “The Freedom Charter,” adopted at the Congress of the People, Kliptown, on June 26, 1955, www.anc.org.za. 7. William Mervin Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC (Cape Town: Zebra Press, 2005), 219–20. 8. Mandela, A Long Walk to Freedom, 490–91. 9. Simple majority rule was actually delayed until 1999. Until then, executive power was shared among all the political parties that won more than 5 percent of the popular vote. Unpublished interview with Nelson Mandela by the filmmaker Ben Cashdan, 2001; Hein Marais, South Africa: Limits to Change: The Political Economy of Transition (Cape Town: University of Cape Town Press, 2001), 91–92. 10. FOOTNOTE: Milton Friedman, “Milton Friedman—Banquet Speech,” given at the Nobel Banquet, December 10, 1976, www.nobelprize.org. 11. Bill Keller, “Can Both Wealth and Justice Flourish in a New South Africa?” New York Times, May 9, 1994. 12. Mark Horton, “Role of Fiscal Policy in Stabilization and Poverty Alleviation,” in Post-Apartheid South Africa: The First Ten Years, ed. Michael Nowak and Luca Antonio Ricci (Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, 2005), 84. 13. FOOTNOTE: Juan Gabriel Valdés, Pinochet’s Economists: The Chicago School in Chile (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 31, 33, quoting Pinochet’s minister of economy Pablo Baraona’s definition of the “new democracy”; Robert Harvey, “Chile’s Counter-Revolution: The Fight Goes On,” The Economist, February 2, 1980 (Harvey was quoting Sergio Fernandez, the minister of the interior); José Piñera, “Wealth Through Ownership: Creating Property Rights in Chilean Mining,” Cato Journal 24, no. 3 (Fall 2004): 298. 14. James Brew, “South Africa—Habitat: A Good Home Is Still Hard to Own,” Inter Press Service, March 11, 1997. 15. David McDonald, “Water: Attack the Problem Not the Data,” Sunday Independent (London), June 19, 2003. 16. Bill Keller, “Cracks in South Africa’s White Monopolies,” New York Times, June 17, 1993. 17. Gumede cites Businessmap statistics asserting that “around 98 percent of executive directors of JSE-listed companies are white, and they preside over 97 percent of the exchange’s total value.” Simon Robinson, “The New Rand Lords,” Time, April 25, 2005; Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 220. 18. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 112. 19. Moyiga Nduru, “S. Africa: Politician Washed Anti-AIDS Efforts Down the Drain,” Inter Press Service, April 11, 2006. 20. “Study: AIDS Slashes SA’s Life Expectancy,” Mail & Guardian (Johannesburg), December 11, 2006. 21. The rand recovered slightly by the end of the day, closing 7 percent lower. Jim Jones, “Foreign Investors Take Fright at Hardline Stance,” Financial Times (London), February 13, 1990. 22. Steven Mufson, “South Africa 1990,” Foreign Affairs [Special Edition: America and the World], 1990/1991. 23. Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Branch (New York: Random House, 2000), 113. 24. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 69. 25. Ibid., 85; “South Africa: Issues of Rugby and Race,” The Economist, August 24, 1996. 26. Nelson Mandela, “Report by the President of the ANC to the 50th National Conference of the African National Congress,” December 16, 1997. 27. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 33–39, 69. 28. Ibid., 79. 29. Marais, South Africa, 122. FOOTNOTE: ANC, Ready to Govern: ANC Policy Guidelines for a Democratic South Africa Adopted at the National Conference, May 28–31, 1992, www.anc.org.za. 30. Ken Wells, “U.S. Investment in South Africa Quickens,” Wall Street Journal, October 6, 1994. 31. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 88. 32. Ibid., 87. 33. Marais, South Africa, 162. 34. Ibid., 170. 35. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 89. 36. Ginger Thompson, “South African Commission Ends Its Work,” New York Times, March 22, 2003. 37. ANC, “The State and Social Transformation,” discussion document, November 1996, www.anc.org.za; Ginger Thompson, “South Africa to Pay $3,900 to Each Family of Apartheid Victims,” New York Times, April 16, 2003; Mandela unpublished interview with Cashdan, 2001. 38. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 108. 39. Ibid., 119. 40. South African Communist Party, “The Debt Debate: Confusion Heaped on Confusion” November–December 1998, www.sacp.org.za; Jeff Rudin, “Apartheid Debt: Questions and Answers,” Alternative Information and Development Centre, March 16, 1999, www.aidc.org.za. FOOTNOTE: Congress of South Africa Trade Unions, “Submission on the Public Investment Corporation Draft Bill,” June 25, 2004, www.cosatu.org.za; Rudin, “Apartheid Debt”; South African Communist Party, “The Debt Debate.” 41. “The Freedom Charter.” 42. Nomvula Mokonyane, “Budget Speech for 2005/06 Financial Year by MEC for Housing in Gauteng,” Speech made in the Guateng Legislature on June 13, 2005, www.info.gov.za. 43. Lucille Davie and Mary Alexander, “Kliptown and the Freedom Charter,” June 27, 2005, www.southafrica.info; Blue IQ, The Plan for a Smart Province—Guateng. 44. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 215. 45. Scott Baldauf, “Class Struggle: South Africa’s New, and Few, Black Rich,” Christian Science Monitor, October 31, 2006; “Human Development Report 2006,” United Nations Development Programme, www.undp.org. 46. “South Africa: The Statistics,” Le Monde Diplomatique, September 2006; Michael Wines and Sharon LaFraniere, “Decade of Democracy Fills Gaps in South Africa,” New York Times, April 26, 2004. 47. Simon Robinson, “The New Rand Lords.” 48. Michael Wines, “Shantytown Dwellers in South Africa Protest the Sluggish Pace of Change,” New York Times, December 25, 2005. 49. Mark Wegerif, Bev Russell and Irma Grundling, Summary of Key Findings from the National Evictions Survey (Polokwane, South Africa: Nkuzi Development Association, 2005), 7, www.nkuzi.org.za. 50. Wines, “Shantytown Dwellers in South Africa Protest …” 51. Gumede, Thabo Mbeki and the Battle for the Soul of the ANC, 72. Internal quotation: Asghar Adelzadeh, “From the RDP to GEAR: The Gradual Embracing of Neo-liberalism in Economic Policy,” Transformation 31, 1996. 52. Ibid., 70. 53. Stephen F Cohen, Failed Crusade: America and the Tragedy of Post-Communist Russia (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2001), 30. 11. Bonfire of a Young Democracy: Russia Chooses “The Pinochet Option” 1. Boris Kagarlitsky, Square Wheels: How Russian Democracy Got Derailed, trans. Leslie A. Auerbach et al. (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1994), 191. 2. William Keegan, The Spectre of Capitalism: The Future of the World Economy After the Fall of Communism (London: Radius, 1992), 109. 3. George J. Church, “The Education of Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev,” Time, January 4, 1988; Gidske Anderson, “The Nobel Peace Prize 1990 Presentation Speech,” www.nobelprize.org. 4. Marshall Pomer, Introduction, in The New Russia: Transition Gone Awry, eds. Lawrence R. Klein and Marshall Pomer (Stanford: Stanford University Press: 2001), 1. 5. Anderson, “The Nobel Peace Prize 1990 Presentation Speech”; Church, “The Education of Mikhail Sergeyevich Gorbachev.” 6. Mikhail Gorbachev, Foreword, in Klein and Pomer, eds., The New Russia, xiv. 7. The unprecedented joint report called for “radical reform” and insisted that borders should be opened to trade simultaneously with any stabilization plan, the two-for-one special discussed by Dani Rodrik in chapter 8. International Monetary Fund, The World Bank, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, The Economy of the USSR: Summary and Recommendations (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1990); author’s interview with Jeffrey Sachs, October 2006, New York City. 8. “Order, Order,” The Economist, December 22, 1990. 9. Ibid.; Michael Schrage, “Pinochet’s Chile a Pragmatic Model for Soviet Economy,” Washington Post, August 23, 1991. 10. Return of the Czar, an episode of Frontline [television series for PBS], producer Sherry Jones, telecast May 9, 2000. 11. Vadim Nikitin, “’91 Foes Linked by Anger and Regret,” Moscow Times, August 21, 2006. 12. Stephen F. Cohen, “America’s Failed Crusade in Russia,” The Nation, February 28, 1994. 13. Author’s interview with Jeffrey Sachs. 14. Peter Passell, “Dr. Jeffrey Sachs, Shock Therapist,” New York Times, June 27, 1993. 15. Peter Reddaway and Dmitri Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms: Market Bolshevism against Democracy (Washington, DC: United States Institute for Peace Press, 2001), 291. 16. Jeffrey D. Sachs, The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time (New York: Penguin Books, 2005), 137. 17. Reddaway and Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms, 253. 18. The Agony of Reform, an episode of Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy [television series for PBS], executive producers Daniel Yergin and Sue Lena Thompson, series producer William Cran (Boston: Heights Productions, 2002); Reddaway and Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms, 237, 298. 19. Mikhail Leontyev, “Two Economists Will Head Russian Reform; Current Digest of the Soviet Press,” Nezavisimaya Gazeta, November 9, 1991, digest available on December 11, 1991. 20. Chrystia Freeland, Sale of the Century: Russia’s Wild Ride from Communism to Capitalism (New York: Crown, 2000), 56. 21. Boris Yeltsin, “Speech to the RSFSR Congress of People’s Deputies,” October 28, 1991. 22. David McClintick, “How Harvard Lost Russia,” Institutional Investor, January 1, 2006. 23. Georgi Arbatov, “Origins and Consequences of ‘Shock Therapy,’” in Klein and Pomer, eds., The New Russia, 171. 24. Vladimir Mau, “Russia,” in The Political Economy of Policy Reform, ed. John Williamson (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994), 435. 25. Ibid., 434–35. 26. Joseph E. Stiglitz, Preface, in Klein and Pomer, eds., The New Russia, xxii. 27. Joseph E. Stiglitz, Globalization and Its Discontents (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2002), 136. 28. Yeltsin, “Speech to the RSFSR Congress of People’s Deputies.” 29. Stephen F. Cohen, “Can We ‘Convert’ Russia?” Washington Post, March 28, 1993; Helen Womack, “Russians Shell Out as Cashless Society Looms,” Independent (London), August 27, 1992. 30. Russian Economic Trends, 1997, page 46, cited in Thane Gustafson, Capitalism Russian-Style (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 171. 31. The Agony of Reform. 32. Gwen Ifill, “Clinton Meets Russian on Assistance Proposal,” New York Times, March 25, 1993. 33. Malcolm Gray, “After Bloody Monday,” Maclean’s, October 18, 1993; Leyla Boulton, “Powers of Persuasion,” Financial Times (London), November 5, 1993. 34. Serge Schmemann, “The Fight to Lead Russia,” New York Times, March 13, 1993. 35. Margaret Shapiro and Fred Hiatt, “Troops Move in to Put Down Uprising After Yeltsin Foes Rampage in Moscow,” Washington Post, October 4, 1993. 36. John Kenneth White and Philip John Davies, Political Parties and the Collapse of the Old Orders (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1998), 209. 37. “Testimony Statement by the Honorable Lawrence H. Summers Under Secretary for International Affairs U.S. Treasury Department Before the Committee on Foreign Relations of the U.S. Senate, September 7, 1993.” 38. Reddaway and Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms, 294. 39. Ibid., 299. 40. Celestine Bohlen, “Rancor Grows in Russian Parliament,” New York Times, March 28, 1993. 41. “The Threat That Was,” The Economist, April 28, 1993; Shapiro and Hiatt, “Troops Move in to Put Down Uprising After Yeltsin Foes Rampage in Moscow.” 42. Serge Schmemann, “Riot in Moscow Amid New Calls for Compromise,” New York Times, October 3, 1993. 43. Leslie H. Gelb, “How to Help Russia,” New York Times, March 14, 1993. FOOTNOTE: Shapiro and Hiatt, “Troops Move in to Put Down Uprising After Yeltsin Foes Rampage in Moscow.” 44. Fred Kaplan, “Yeltsin in Command as Hard-Liners Give Up,” Boston Globe, October 5, 1993. 45. “The authorities declared that in the course of two days, 142 people were killed in Moscow. This was a mockery—the real number of dead had to have been several times greater. No one even tried to determine the precise number who were wounded and beaten. Thousands were arrested.” Kagarlitsky, Square Wheels, 218. 46. Reddaway and Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms, 427. 47. Kagarlitsky, Square Wheels, 212. 48. John M. Goshko, “Victory Seen for Democracy,” Washington Post, October 5, 1993; David Nyhan, “Russia Escapes a Return to the Dungeon of Its Past,” Boston Globe, October 5, 1993; Reddaway and Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms, 431. 49. Return of the Czar. 50. Nikitin, “’91 Foes Linked by Anger and Regret.” 51. Cacilie Rohwedder, “Sachs Defends His Capitalist Shock Therapy,” Wall Street Journal Europe, October 25, 1993. 52. Sachs, The End of Poverty. 53. Arthur Spiegelman, “Western Experts Call for Russian Shock Therapy,” Reuters, October 6, 1993. 54. Dorinda Elliott and Betsy McKay, “Yeltsin’s Free-Market Offensive,” Newsweek, October 18, 1993; Adi Ignatius and Claudia Rosett, “Yeltsin Now Faces Divided Nation,” Asian Wall Street Journal, October 5, 1993. 55. Stanley Fischer, “Russia and the Soviet Union Then and Now,” in The Transition in Eastern Europe, ed. Olivier Jean Blanchard, Kenneth A. Froot and Jeffrey D. Sachs, Country Studies, vol. 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 1994), 237. 56. Lawrence H. Summers, “Comment,” in The Transition in Eastern Europe, Country Studies, vol. 1, 253. 57. Jeffrey Tayler, “Russia Is Finished,” Atlantic Monthly, May 2001; “The World’s Billionaires, According to Forbes Magazine, Listed by Country,” Associated Press, February 27, 2003. 58. E. S. Browning, “Bond Investors Gamble on Russian Stocks,” Wall Street Journal, March 24, 1995. 59. Legislator Sergei Yushenkov is quoting Oleg Lobov. Carlotta Gall and Thomas De Waal, Chechnya: Calamity in the Caucasus (New York: New York University Press, 1998), 161. 60. Vsevolod Vilchek, “Ultimatum on Bended Knees,” Moscow News, May 2, 1996. 61. Passell, “Dr. Jeffrey Sachs, Shock Therapist.” 62. David Hoffman, “Yeltsin’s ‘Ruthless’ Bureaucrat,” Washington Post, November 22, 1996. 63. Svetlana P. Glinkina et al., “Crime and Corruption,” in Klein and Pomer, eds., The New Russia, 241; Matt Bivens and Jonas Bernstein, “The Russia You Never Met,” Demokratizatsiya: The Journal of Post-Soviet Democracy 6, no. 4 (Fall 1998): 630, www.demokratizatsiya.org. 64. Bivens and Bernstein, “The Russia You Never Met,” 627–28; Total, Factbook 1998–2006, April 2006, page 2, www.total.com; The profit figure is for 2000: Marshall I. Goldman, The Piratization of Russia: Russian Reform Goes Awry (New York: Routledge, 2003), 120; “Yukos Offers 12.5 Percent Stake against Debts to State-Owned Former Unit,” Associated Press, June 5, 2006; the $2.8 billion figure is based on the fact that in 1997 British Petroleum paid $571 million for a 10 percent stake in Sidanko, and at that rate the 51 percent stake would have been worth more than $2.8 billion: Freeland, Sale of the Century, 183; Stanislav Lunev, “Russian Organized Crime Spreads Beyond Russia’s Borders,” Prism 3, no. 8 (May 30, 1997). 65. Bivens and Bernstein, “The Russia You Never Met,” 629. 66. Reddaway and Glinski, The Tragedy of Russia’s Reforms, 254. 67. Freeland, Sale of the Century, 299. 68. Return of the Czar. 69. Bivens and Bernstein report that “allegations surfaced that Chubais and four of his reform lieutenants—all of them men who had been supported by Chubais’s USAID-funded patronage—had accepted $90,000 each in bribes disguised as a book advance from Uneximbank” (one of the main oligarchic firms that was winning lucrative privatization contracts from these men). In a similar controversy, Alfred Kokh, second in charge of privatization for the Yeltsin government, was paid $100,000 by a company linked to one of the main oligarchs to whom he was awarding privatization contracts; fittingly, the money was supposedly for a book he was to write on the efficiency of privatized companies. Ultimately, neither man was prosecuted in connection with the separate book deals. Bivens and Bernstein, “The Russia You Never Met,” 636; Vladimir Isachenkov, “Prosecutors Investigate Russia’s Ex-Privatization Czar,” Associated Press, October 1, 1997. 70. McClintick, “How Harvard Lost Russia.” 71. U.S. District Court, District of Massachusetts, “United States of America, Plaintiff, v. President and Fellows of Harvard College, Andrei Shleifer and Jonathan Hay, Defendants: Civil Action No. 00–11977-DPW,” Memorandum and Order, June 28, 2004; McClintick, “How Harvard Lost Russia.” 72. McClintick, “How Harvard Lost Russia.” 73. Dan Josefsson, “The Art of Ruining a Country with a Little Professional Help from Sweden,” ETC (Stockholm) English edition, 1999. 74. Ernest Beck, “Soros Begins Investing in Eastern Europe,” Wall Street Journal, June 1, 1994; Andrew Jack, Arkady Ostrovsky and Charles Pretzlik, “Soros to Sell ‘The Worst Investment of My Life,’” Financial Times (London), March 17, 2004. 75. Brian Whitmore, “Latest Polls Showing Communists Ahead,” Moscow Times, September 8, 1999. 76. Return of the Czar. 77. Helen Womack, “Terror Alert in Moscow as Third Bombing Kills 73,” Independent (London), September 14, 1999. 78. Aslan Nurbiyev, “Last Bodies Cleared from Rebels’ Secret Grozny Cemetery,” Agence France-Presse, April 6, 2006. 79. Sabrina Tavernise, “Farms as Business in Russia,” New York Times, November 6, 2001; Josefsson, “The Art of Ruining a Country with a Little Professional Help from Sweden”; “News Conference by James Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank Re: IMF Spring Meeting,” Washington, DC, April 22, 1999, www.imf.org; Branko Milanovic, Income, Inequality and Poverty during the Transition from Planned to Market Economy (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1998), 68; Working Center for Economic Reform, Government of the Russian Federation, Russian Economic Trends 5, no. 1 (1996): 56–57, cited in Bertram Silverman and Murray Yanowitch, New Rich, New Poor, New Russia: Winners and Losers on the Russian Road to Capitalism (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2000), 47. 80. The 715,000 statistic comes from the Russian health and social development minister. “Russia Has More Than 715,000 Homeless Children—Health Minister,” RIA Novosti news agency, February 23, 2006; Carel De Rooy, UNICEF, Children in the Russian Federation, November 16, 2004, page 5, www.unicef.org. 81. In 1987, Russia’s per capita alcohol consumption was 3.9 liters. In 2003 it reached 8.87 liters. World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, “3050 Pure Alcohol Consumption, Litres Per Capita, 1987, 2003,” European Health for All Database (HFA-DB), data.euro.who.int/hfadb; “In Sad Tally, Russia Counts More Than 4 Million Addicts,” Pravda (Moscow), February 20, 2004; UNAIDS, “Annex 1: Russian Federation,” 2006 Global Report on the AIDS Epidemic, May 2006, page 437, www.unaids.org; Interview with Natalya Katsap, Manager, Media Partnerships, Transatlantic Partners Against AIDS, June 2006. 82. World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, “1780 SDR, Suicide and Self-Inflicted Injury, All Ages Per 100,000, 1986–1994,” European Health for All Database (HFA-DB), data.euro.who.int/hfadb; In 1986, the rate of homicide and intentional injuries per 100,000 people was 7.3; in 1994 it reached its high of 32.9; in 2004 it was down to 25.2. World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, “1793 SDR, Homicide and Intentional Injury, All Ages Per 100,000, 1986–2004,” European Health for All Database. 83. Nikitin, “’91 Foes Linked by Anger and Regret”; Stephen F. Cohen, “The New American Cold War,” The Nation, July 10, 2006; Central Intelligence Agency, “Russia,” World Factbook 1992 (Washington, DC: CIA, 1992), 287; Central Intelligence Agency, “Russia,” World Factbook 2007, www.cia.gov. 84. Colin McMahon, “Shortages Leave Russia’s East Out in the Cold,” Chicago Tribune, November 19, 1998. 85. Arbatov, “Origins and Consequences of ‘Shock Therapy,’” 177. 86. Richard Pipes, “Russia’s Chance,” Commentary 93, no. 3 (March 1992): 30. 87. Richard E. Ericson, “The Classical Soviet-Type Economy: Nature of the System and Implications for Reform,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, no. 4 (Autumn 1991): 25. 88. Tayler, “Russia Is Finished”; Richard Lourie, “Shock of Calamity,” Los Angeles Times, March 21, 1999. 89. Josefsson, “The Art of Ruining a Country with a Little Professional Help from Sweden.” 90. Tatyana Koshkareva and Rustam Narzikulov, Nezavisimaya Gazeta (Moscow), October 31, 1997; Paul Klebnikov and Carrie Shook, “Russia and Central Europe: The New Frontier,” Forbes, July 28, 1997. 91. Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, ed. Edwin Cannan (New York: Modern Library, 1937), 532. 92. I am indebted to David Harvey for informing this analysis. David Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism (New York: Oxford University Press, 2005). 93. Michael Schuman, “Billionaires in the Making,” Forbes, July 18, 1994; Harvey, A Brief History of Neoliberalism, 103. 94. “YPFB: Selling a National Symbol,” Institutional Investor, March 1, 1997; Jonathan Friedland, “Money Transfer,” Wall Street Journal, August 15, 1995. 95. Friedland, “Money Transfer.” 96. Paul Blustein, And the Money Kept Rolling In (and Out): Wall Street, the IMF, and the Bankrupting of Argentina (New York: PublicAffairs, 2005), 24, 29; Nathaniel C. Nash, “Argentina’s President, Praised Abroad, Finds Himself in Trouble at Home,” New York Times, June 8, 1991; Tod Robberson, “Argentine President’s Exit Inspires Mixed Emotions,” Dallas Morning News, October 18, 1999. 97. Paul Brinkley-Rogers, “Chaos Reigns as President Flees Uprising,” Daily Telegraph (London), December 22, 2001. 98. Jean Friedman-Rudovsky, “Bolivia Calls Ex-President to Court,” Time, February 6, 2007. 12: The Capitalist Id: Russia and the New Era of the Boor Market 1. John Maynard Keynes, “From Keynes to Roosevelt: Our Recovery Plan Assayed,” New York Times, December 31, 1933. 2. Ashley M. Herer, “Oprah, Bono Promote Clothing Line, iPod,” Associated Press, October 13, 2006. 3. T. Christian Miller, Blood Money: Wasted Billions, Lost Lives, and Corporate Greed in Iraq (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2006), 123. FOOTNOTE p. 248: John Cassidy, “Always with Us,” The New Yorker, April 11, 2005. 4. Peter Passell, “Dr. Jeffrey Sachs, Shock Therapist,” New York Times, June 27, 1993. 5. Jeffrey Sachs, “Life in the Economic Emergency Room,” in The Political Economy of Policy Reform, ed. John Williamson (Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994), 516. 6. “Roosevelt Victor by 7,054,520 Votes,” New York Times, December 25, 1932; Raymond Moley, After Seven Years (New York: Harper & Brothers, 1939), 305. 7. Carolyn Eisenberg, Drawing the Line: The American Decision to Divide Germany, 1944–1949 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996). 8. The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 44. 9. Sachs, “Life in the Economic Emergency Room,” 503–504, 513. 10. John Williamson, The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 19, 26. 11. John Williamson and Stephan Haggard, “The Political Conditions for Economic Reform,” in The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 565. 12. Williamson, The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 20. 13. John Toye, The Political Economy of Policy Reform, 41. 14. Bruce Little, “Debt Crisis Looms, Study Warns,” Globe and Mail (Toronto), February 16, 1993; The TV report was on W5 on CTV, hosted by Eric Malling. Linda McQuaig, Shooting the Hippo: Death by Deficit and Other Canadian Myths (Toronto: Penguin, 1995), 3. 15. The information in this paragraph is drawn from McQuaig, Shooting the Hippo, 18, 42–44, 117. 16. Ibid., 44, 46. 17. “How to Invent a Crisis in Education,” Globe and Mail (Toronto), September 15, 1995. 18. Information in the next two paragraphs is drawn from Michael Bruno, Deep Crises and Reform: What Have We Learned? (Washington, DC: World Bank, 1996), 4, 6, 13, 25. Emphasis in original. 19. Ibid., 6. Emphasis added. 20. The figure for World Bank membership refers to 1995. There are now 185 member countries. 21. Information in the next four paragraphs is drawn from Davison L. Budhoo, Enough Is Enough: Dear Mr. Camdessus … Open Letter of Resignation to the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund (New York: New Horizons Press, 1990), 2–27. 22. Most of Budhoo’s allegations center on the discrepancies in the calculations for Trinidad and Tobago’s Relative Unit Labor Cost, which is an extremely important economic indicator that measures countries’ productivity. He writes, “On the basis of calculations made by our divisional statistician last year after the Fund mission returned from the field, the Relative Unit Labour Cost in Trinidad and Tobago increased by 69 percent only, instead of the 145.8 percent as stated in our 1985 reports, and the 142.9 percent as claimed in the 1986 Fund documents. Between 1980–85 the RULC actually rose by a mere 66.1 percent instead of our assertion of 164.7 percent made in the 1986 reports. Over 1983–85 relative unit labour costs moved up by only 14.9 percent, not by the 36.9 percent that was mooted to the world community in 1986. In 1985, instead of rising by the 9 percent that we had stated in the RED and Staff Report, the RULC Index fell by 1.7 percent. And in 1986 relative unit labour costs slid downward spectacularly by 46.5 percent although there is no record of this in the 1987 report or anywhere else in official Fund documentation.” Ibid., 17. 23. “Bitter Calypsos in the Caribbean,” Guardian (London), July 30, 1990; Robert Weissman, “Playing with Numbers: The IMF’s Fraud in Trinidad and Tobago,” Multinational Monitor 11, no. 6 (June 1990). 24. Lawrence Van Gelder, “Mr. Budhoo’s Letter of Resignation from the I.M.F. (50 Years Is Enough),” New York Times, March 20, 1996. 13. Let It Burn: The Looting of Asia and “The Fall of a Second Berlin Wall” 1. Anita Raghavan, “Wall Street Is Scavenging in Asia-Pacific,” Wall Street Journal, February 10, 1998. 2. R. William Liddle, “Year One of the Yudhoyono–Kalla Duumvirate,” Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies 41, no. 3 (December 2005): 337. 3. “The Weakest Link,” The Economist, February 8, 2003. 4. Irma Adelman, “Lessons from Korea,” in The New Russia: Transition Gone Awry, eds. Lawrence R. Klein and Marshall Pomer (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2001), 129. 5. David McNally, “Globalization on Trial” Monthly Review, September 1998. 6. “Apec Highlights Social Impact of Asian Financial Crisis,” Bernama news agency, May 25, 1998. 7. Hur Nam-Il, “Gold Rush … Korean Style,” Business Korea, March 1998; “Selling Pressure Mounts on Korean Won—Report,” Korea Herald (Seoul), May 12, 1998. 8. “Elderly Suicide Rate on the Increase,” Korea Herald (Seoul), October 27, 1999; “Economic Woes Driving More to Suicide,” Korea Times (Seoul), April 23, 1998. 9. The crisis hit in 1994, but the loan did not come through until early 1995. 10. “Milton Friedman Discusses the IMF,” CNN Moneyline with Lou Dobbs, January 22, 1998; George P. Shultz, William E. Simon and Walter B. Wriston, “Who Needs the IMF,” Wall Street Journal, February 3, 1998. 11. Milken Institute, “Global Overview,” Global Conference 1998, Los Angeles, March 12, 1998, www.milkeninstitute.org. 12. Bill Clinton, “Joint Press Conference with Prime Minister Chrétien,” November 23, 1997, www.clintonfoundation.org. 13. Milken Institute, “Global Overview.” 14. José Piñera, “The ‘Third Way’ Keeps Countries in the Third World,” prepared for the Cato Institute’s 16th Annual Monetary Conference cosponsored with The Economist, Washington, DC, October 22, 1998; José Piñera, “The Fall of a Second Berlin Wall,” October 22, 1998, www.josepinera.com. 15. “U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations Holds Hearing on the Role of the IMF in the Asian Financial Crisis,” February 12, 1998; “Text–Greenspan’s Speech to New York Economic Club,” Reuters News, December 3, 1997. 16. M. Perez and S. Tobarra, “Los países asiáticos tendrán que aceptar cierta flexibilidad que no era necesaria hasta ahora,” El País International Edition (Madrid), December 8, 1997; “IMF Chief Calls for Abandon of ‘Asian Model,’” Agence France-Presse, December 1, 1997. 17. Interview with Mahathir Mohamad conducted July 2, 2001, for Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy, www.pbs.org. 18. Interview with Stanley Fischer conducted May 9, 2001, for Commanding Heights, www.pbs.org. 19. Stephen Grenville, “The IMF and the Indonesian Crisis,” background paper, Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF, May 2004, page 8, www.imf.org. 20. Walden Bello, “The IMF’s Hidden Agenda,” The Nation (Bangkok), January 25, 1998. 21. Fischer, Commanding Heights; Joseph Kahn, “I.M.F.’s Hand Often Heavy, a Study Says,” New York Times, October 21, 2000. FOOTNOTE: Paul Blustein, The Chastening: Inside the Crisis That Rocked the Global Financial System and Humbled the IMF (New York: PublicAffairs, 2001), 6–7. 22. The IMF agreement with South Korea explicitly demanded “easing restrictions in the labor market over redundancies (to enable businesses to move from one industry to another).” Cited in Martin Hart-Landsberg and Paul Burkett, “Economic Crisis and Restructuring in South Korea: Beyond the Free Market-Statist Debate,” Critical Asian Studies 33, no. 3 (2001): 421; Alkman Granitsas and Dan Biers, “Economies: The Next Step: The IMF Has Stopped Asia’s Financial Panic,” Far Eastern Economic Review, April 23, 1998; Cindy Shiner, “Economic Crisis Clouds Indonesian’s Reforms,” Washington Post, September 10, 1998. 23. Soren Ambrose, “South Korean Union Sues the IMF,” Economic Justice News 2, no. 4 (January 2000). 24. Nicola Bullard, Taming the Tigers: The IMF and the Asian Crisis (London: Focus on the Global South, March 2, 1999), www.focusweb.org; Walden Bello, A Siamese Tragedy: The Collapse of Democracy in Thailand (London: Focus on the Global South, September 29, 2006), www.focusweb.org. 25. Jeffrey Sachs, “Power Unto Itself,” Financial Times (London), December 11, 1997. 26. Michael Lewis “The World’s Biggest Going-Out-of-Business Sale,” New York Times Magazine, May 31, 1998. 27. Ian Chalmers, “Tommy’s Toys Trashed,” Inside Indonesia 56 (October–December 1998). 28. Paul Blustein and Sandra Sugawara, “Rescue Plan for Indonesia in Jeopardy,” Washington Post, January 7, 1998; Grenville, “The IMF and the Indonesian Crisis,” 10. 29. McNally, “Globalization on Trial.” 30. “Magic Arts of Jakarta’s ‘Witch-Doctor,’” Financial Times (London), November 3, 1997. 31. Susan Sim, “Jakarta’s Technocrats vs. the Technologists,” Straits Times (Singapore), November 30, 1997; Kahn, “I.M.F.’s Hand Often Heavy, a Study Says.” 32. International Monetary Fund, The IMF’s Response to the Asian Crisis, January 1999, www.imf.org. 33. Paul Blustein, “At the IMF, a Struggle Shrouded in Secrecy,” Washington Post, March 30, 1998; Martin Feldstein, “Refocusing the IMF,” Foreign Affairs, March–April 1998; Jeffrey Sachs, “The IMF and the Asian Flu,” American Prospect, March–April 1998. 34. South Korea went from 2.6 to 7.6 percent, Indonesia from 4 to 12 percent. Similar patterns occurred in the other countries. International Labour Organization, “ILO Governing Body to Examine Response to Asia Crisis,” press release, March 16, 1999; Mary Jordan, “Middle Class Plunging Back to Poverty,” Washington Post, September 6, 1998; McNally, “Globalization on Trial”; Florence Lowe-Lee, “Where Is Korea’s Middle Class?” Korea Insight 2, no. 11 (November 2000): 1; James D. Wolfensohn, “Opening Address by the President of the World Bank Group,” Summary Proceedings of the Fifty-Third Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, October 6–8, 1998), 31, www.imf.org. 35. “Array of Crimes Linked to the Financial Crisis, Meeting Told,” New Straits Times (Kuala Lumpur), June 1, 1999; Nussara Sawatsawang, “Prostitution—Alarm Bells Sound Amid Child Sex Rise,” Bangkok Post, December 24, 1999; Luz Baguioro, “Child Labour Rampant in the Philippines,” Straits Times (Singapore), February 12, 2000; “Asian Financial Crisis Rapidly Creating Human Crisis: World Bank,” Agence France-Presse, September 29, 1998. 36. Laura Myers, “Albright Offers Thais Used F-16s, Presses Banking Reforms,” Associated Press, March 4, 1999. 37. Independent Evaluation Office of the IMF, The IMF and Recent Capital Account Crises: Indonesia, Korea, Brazil (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, September 12, 2003): 42–43, www.imf.org; Grenville, “The IMF and the Indonesian Crisis,” 8. 38. Craig Mellow, “Treacherous Times,” Institutional Investor International Edition, May 1999. 39. Raghavan, “Wall Street Is Scavenging in Asia-Pacific.” 40. Rory McCarthy, “Merrill Lynch Buys Yamaichi Branches, Now Japan’s Biggest Foreign Broker,” Agence France-Presse, February 12, 1998; “Phatra Thanakit Announces Partnership with Merrill Lynch,” Merrill Lynch press release, June 4, 1998; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, World Investment Report 1998: Trends and Determinants (New York: United Nations, 1998): 337; James Xiaoning Zhan and Terutomo Ozawa, Business Restructuring in Asia: Cross-Border M&As in the Crisis Period (Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School Press, 2001), 100; “Advisory Board for Salomon,” Financial Times (London), May 18, 1999; “Korea Ssangyong Sells Info Unit Shares to Carlyle,” Reuters News, January 2, 2001; “JP Morgan—Carlyle Consortium to Become Largest Shareholder of KorAm,” Korea Times (Seoul), September 9, 2000. 41. Nicholas D. Kristof, “Worsening Financial Flu in Asia Lowers Immunity to U.S. Business,” New York Times, February 1, 1998. 42. Lewis, “The World’s Biggest Going-Out-of-Business Sale”; Mark L. Clifford, “Invasion of the Bargain Snatchers,” BusinessWeek, March 2, 1998. 43. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, World Investment Report 1998, 336; Zhan and Ozawa, Business Restructuring in Asia, 99; “Chronology-GM Takeover Talks with Daewoo Motor Creditors,” Reuters, April 30, 2002. 44. Zhan and Ozawa, Business Restructuring in Asia, 96–102; Clifford, “Invasion of the Bargain Snatchers.” 45. Alexandra Harney, “GM Close to Taking 67% Stake in Daewoo for $400M,” Financial Times (London), September 20, 2001; Stephanie Strom, “Korea to Sell Control of Banks to U.S. Investors,” New York Times, January 1, 1999. 46. Charlene Barshefsky, “Trade Issues with Asian Countries,” Testimony before the Subcommittee on Trade of the House Committee on Ways and Means, February 24, 1998. 47. “International Water—Ayala Consortium Wins Manila Water Privatization Contract,” Business Wire, January 23, 1997; “Bechtel Wins Contract to Build Oil Refinery in Indonesia,” Asia Pulse news agency, September 22, 1999; “Mergers of S. Korean Handset Makers with Foreign Cos on the Rise,” Asia Pulse news agency, November 1, 2004; United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, World Investment Report 1998, 337; Zhan and Ozawa, Business Restructuring in Asia, 96–99. 48. Zhan and Ozawa, Business Restructuring in Asia, 96–102; Robert Wade and Frank Veneroso, “The Asian Crisis: The High Debt Model Versus the Wall Street-Treasury-IMF Complex,” New Left Review 228 (March–April 1998). 49. “Milton Friedman Discusses the IMF,” CNN Moneyline with Lou Dobbs, January 22, 1998. 50. In 1995, the suicide rate was 11.8 per 100,000 people; in 2005 it was 26.1 per 100,000, an increase of 121 percent. World Factbook 1997 (Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency, 1997); World Factbook 2007, www.cia.gov; “S. Korea Has Top Suicide Rate among OECD Countries: Report,” Asia Pulse news agency, September 18, 2006; “S. Korean Police Confirm Actress Suicide,” Agence France-Presse, February 12, 2007. 51. United Nations Human Settlements Program, 2005 Annual Report (Nairobi: UN-HABITAT, 2006), 5–6, www.unchs.org; Rainer Maria Rilke, Duino Elegies and the Sonnets to Orpheus, trans. A. Poulin Jr. (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977), 51. 52. “Indonesia Admits to Rapes during Riots,” Washington Post, December 22, 1998. 53. “The Weakest Link”; Thomas L. Friedman, The Lexus and the Olive Tree (New York: Farrar, Straus and, Giroux, 1999), 452–53. 54. “The Critics of Capitalism,” Financial Times (London), November 27, 1999. 55. Fischer, Commanding Heights; Blustein, The Chastening, 6–7. 14. Shock Therapy in the U.S.A.: The Homeland Security Bubble 1. Tom Baldwin, “Revenge of the Battered Generals,” Times (London), April 18, 2006. 2. Reuters, “Britain’s Ranking on Surveillance Worries Privacy Advocate,” New York Times, November 3, 2006. 3. Daniel Gross, “The Homeland Security Bubble,” Slate.com, June 1, 2005. 4. Robert Burns, “Defense Chief Shuns Involvement in Weapons and Merger Decisions to Avoid Conflict of Interest,” Associated Press, August 23, 2001. 5. John Burgess, “Tuning in to a Trophy Technology,” Washington Post, March 24, 1992; “TIS Worldwide Announces the Appointment of the Honorable Donald Rumsfeld to its Board of Advisors,” PR Newswire, April 25, 2000; Geoffrey Lean and Jonathan Owen, “Donald Rumsfeld Makes $5M Killing on Bird Flu Drug,” Independent (London), March 12, 2006. 6. George W. Bush, “Bush Delivers Remarks with Rumsfeld, Gates,” CQ Transcripts Wire, November 8, 2006. 7. Joseph L. Galloway, “After Losing War Game, Rumsfeld Packed Up His Military and Went to War,” Knight-Ridder, April 26, 2006. 8. Jeffrey H. Birnbaum, “Mr. CEO Goes to Washington,” Fortune, March 19, 2001. 9. Donald H. Rumsfeld, “Secretary Rumsfeld’s Remarks to the Johns Hopkins, Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies,” December 5, 2005, www.defenselink.mil; Tom Peters, The Circle of Innovation (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1997), 16. 10. Information on the next 2 pages is drawn from Donald H. Rumsfeld, “DoD Acquisition and Logistics Excellence Week Kickoff—Bureaucracy to Battlefield,” speech made at the Pentagon, September 10, 2001, www.defenselink.mil. 11. Carolyn Skorneck, “Senate Committee Approves New Base Closings, Cuts $1.3 Billion from Missile Defense,” Associated Press, September 7, 2001; Rumsfeld, “DoD Acquisition and Logistics Excellence Week Kickoff.” 12. Bill Hemmer and Jamie McIntyre, “Defense Secretary Declares War on the Pentagon’s Bureaucracy,” CNN Evening News, September 10, 2001. 13. Donald Rumsfeld, “Tribute to Milton Friedman,” Washington, DC, May 9, 2002, www.defenselink.mil; Milton Friedman and Rose D. Friedman, Two Lucky People: Memoirs (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 345. 14. Friedman and Friedman, Two Lucky People, 391. 15. William Gruber, “Rumsfeld Reflects on Politics, Business,” Chicago Tribune, October 20, 1993; Stephen J. Hedges, “Winter Comes for a Beltway Lion,” Chicago Tribune, November 12, 2006. 16. Greg Schneider, “Rumsfeld Shunning Weapons Decisions,” Washington Post, August 24, 2001; Andrew Cockburn, Rumsfeld: His Rise, Fall, and Catastrophic Legacy (New York: Scribner, 2007), 89–90; Randeep Ramesh, “The Two Faces of Rumsfeld,” Guardian (London), May 9, 2003; Richard Behar, “Rummy’s North Korea Connection,” Fortune, May 12, 2003. 17. Joe Palca, “Salk Polio Vaccine Conquered Terrifying Disease,” National Public Radio: Morning Edition, April 12, 2005; David M. Oshinsky, Polio: An American Story (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 210–11. FOOTNOTE: Carly Weeks, “Tamiflu Linked to 10 Deaths,” Gazette (Montreal), November 30, 2006; Dorsey Griffith, “Psychiatric Warning Put on Flu Drug,” Sacramento Bee, November 14, 2006. 18. Knowledge Ecology International, “KEI Request for Investigation into Anticompetitive Aspects of Gilead Voluntary Licenses for Patents on Tenofivir and Emtricitabine,” February 12, 2007, www.keionline.org. 19. John Stanton, “Big Stakes in Tamiflu Debate,” Roll Call, December 15, 2005. 20. Information in the next two paragraphs is drawn from T. Christian Miller, Blood Money: Wasted Billions, Lost Lives and Corporate Greed in Iraq (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2006), 77–79. 21. Joan Didion, “Cheney: The Fatal Touch,” The New York Review of Books, October 5, 2006. 22. Dan Briody, Halliburton Agenda: The Politics of Oil and Money (New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2004), 198–99; David H. Hackworth, “Balkans Good for Texas-Based Business,” Sun-Sentinel (Fort Lauderdale), August 16, 2001. 23. Antonia Juhasz, Bush Agenda: Invading the World, One Economy at a Time (New York: Regan Books, 2006), 120. 24. Jonathan D. Salant, “Cheney: I’ll Forfeit Options,” Associated Press, September 1, 2000. 25. “Lynne Cheney Resigns from Lockheed Martin Board,” Dow Jones News Service, January 5, 2001. 26. Tim Weiner, “Lockheed and the Future of Warfare,” New York Times, November 28, 2004. FOOTNOTE: Jeff McDonald, “City Looks at County’s Outsourcing as Blueprint,” San Diego Union-Tribune, July 23, 2006. 27. Sam Howe Verhovek, “Clinton Reining in Role for Business in Welfare Effort,” New York Times, May 11, 1997; Barbara Vobejda, “Privatization of Social Programs Curbed,” Washington Post, May 10, 1997. 28. Michelle Breyer and Mike Ward, “Running Prisons for a Profit,” Austin American-Statesman, September 4, 1994; Judith Greene, “Bailing Out Private Jails,” The American Prospect, September 10, 2001; Madeline Baro, “Tape Shows Inmates Bit by Dogs, Kicked, Stunned,” Associated Press, August 19, 1997. 29. Matt Moffett, “Pension Reform Pied Piper Loves Private Accounts,” Wall Street Journal, March 3, 2005. 30. “Governor George W. Bush Delivers Remarks on Government Reform,” FDCH Political Transcripts, Philadelphia, June 9, 2000. 31. Jon Elliston, “Disaster in the Making,” Tucson Weekly, September 23, 2004. 32. Joe M. Allbaugh, “Current FEMA Instructions & Manuals Numerical Index,” Testimony of Federal Emergency Management Agency Director Joe M. Allbaugh before the Veterans Affairs, Housing and Urban Development and Independent Agencies Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee, May 16, 2001. 33. John F. Harris and Dana Milbank, “For Bush, New Emergencies Ushered in a New Agenda,” Washington Post, September 22, 2001; United States General Accounting Office, Aviation Security: Long-Standing Problems Impair Airport Screeners’ Performance, June 2000, page 25, www.gao.gov. 34. National Commission on Terrorist Attacks upon the United States, The 9/11 Commission Report: Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, 2004, page 85, www.gpoaccess.gov. 35. Anita Manning, “Company Hopes to Restart Production of Anthrax Vaccine,” USA Today, November 5, 2001. 36. J. McLane, “Conference to Honor Milton Friedman on His Ninetieth Birthday,” Chicago Business, November 25, 2002, www.chibus.com. 37. Joan Ryan, “Home of the Brave,” San Francisco Chronicle, October 23, 2001; George W. Bush, “President Honors Public Servants,” Washington, DC, October 15, 2001. 38. George W. Bush, “President Discusses War on Terrorism,” Atlanta, Georgia, November 8, 2001. 39. Harris and Milbank, “For Bush, New Emergencies Ushered in a New Agenda.” 40. Andrew Bacevich, “Why Read Clausewitz When Shock and Awe Can Make a Clean Sweep of Things?” London Review of Books, June 8, 2006. FOOTNOTE: Scott Shane and Ron Nixon, “In Washington, Contractors Take on Biggest Role Ever,” New York Times, February 4, 2007. 41. Evan Ratliff, “Fear, Inc.,” Wired, December 2005. 42. Shane and Nixon, “In Washington, Contractors Take on Biggest Role Ever.” 43. Matt Richtel, “Tech Investors Cull Start-ups for Pentagon,” Washington Post, May 7, 2007; Defense Venture Catalyst Initiative, “An Overview of the Defense Venture Catalyst Initiative,” devenci.dtic.mil. 44. Ratliff, “Fear, Inc.” 45. Jason Vest, “Inheriting a Shambles at Defense” Texas Observer (Austin), December 1, 2006; Ratliff, “Fear, Inc.”; Paladin Capital Group, “Lt. General (Ret) USAF Kenneth A. Minihan,” Paladin Team, December 2, 2003, www.paladincapgroup.com. 46. Office of Homeland Security, National Strategy for Homeland Security, July 2002, page 1, www.whitehouse.gov; Ron Suskind, The One Percent Doctrine: Deep Inside America’s Pursuit of Its Enemies Since 9/11 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006); “Terror Fight Spawns Startups,” Red Herring, December 5, 2005. 47. United States House of Representatives, Committee on Government Reform—Minority Staff, Special Investigations Division, Dollars, Not Sense: Government Contracting Under the Bush Administration, Prepared for Rep. Henry A. Waxman, June 2006, page 5, www.democrats.reform.house.gov; Tim Shorrock, “The Corporate Takeover of U.S. Intelligence,” Salon, June 1, 2007, www.salon.com; Rachel Monahan and Elena Herrero Beaumont, “Big Time Security,” Forbes, August 3, 2006; Central Intelligence Agency, World Fact Book 2007, www.cia.gov; “US Government Spending in States Up 6 Pct in FY’03,” Reuters, October 7, 2004; Frank Rich, “The Road from K Street to Yusufiya,” New York Times, June 25, 2006. 48. Monahan and Herrero Beaumont, “Big Time Security”; Ratliff, “Fear, Inc.” 49. The figure comes from Roger Cressey, a former Bush counterterrorism official now President of Good Harbor Consulting. Rob Evans and Alexi Mostrous, “Britain’s Surveillance Future,” Guardian (London), November 2, 2006; Mark Johnson, “Video, Sound Advances Aimed at War on Terror,” Associated Press, August 2, 2006; Ellen McCarthy, “8 Firms Vie for Pieces of Air Force Contract,” Washington Post, September 14, 2004. 50. Brian Bergstein, “Attacks Spawned a Tech-Security Market That Remains Young Yet Rich,” Associated Press, September 4, 2006. 51. Mure Dickie, “Yahoo Backed on Helping China Trace Writer,” Financial Times (London), November 10, 2005; Leslie Cauley, “NSA Has Massive Database of Americans’ Phone Calls,” USA Today, May 11, 2006; “Boeing Team Awarded SBInet Contract by Department of Homeland Security,” press release, September 21, 2006, www.boeing.com. 52. Robert O’Harrow Jr., No Place to Hide (New York: Free Press, 2005). 53. “Terror Fight Spawns Startups.” 54. Justine Rood, “FBI Terror Watch List ‘Out of Control’,” The Blotter blog on ABC News, June 13, 2007, www.abcnews.com; Ed Pilkington, “Millions Assigned Terror Risk Score on Trips to the US,” Guardian (London), December 2, 2006. 55. Rick Anderson, “Flog Is My Co-Pilot,” Seattle Weekly, November 29, 2006; Jane Mayer, “The C.I.A.’s Travel Agent,” The New Yorker, October 30, 2006; Brian Knowlton, “Report Rejects European Denial of CIA Prisons,” New York Times, November 29, 2006; Mayer, “The C.I.A.’s Travel Agent”; Stephen Grey, Ghost Plane: The True Story of the CIA Torture Program (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2006), 80; Pat Milton, “ACLU File: Suit Against Boeing Subsidiary, Saying It Enabled Secret Overseas Torture,” Associated Press, May 31, 2007. 56. Andrew Buncombe, “New Maximum-Security Jail to Open at Guantanamo Bay,” Independent (London), July 30, 2006; Pratap Chatterjee, “Intelligence in Iraq: L-3 Supplies Spy Support,” CorpWatch, August 9, 2006, www.corpwatch.com. 57. Michelle Faul, “Guantanamo Prisoners for Sale,” Associated Press, May 31, 2005; John Simpson, “No Surprises in the War on Terror,” BBC News, February 13, 2006; John Mintz, “Detainees Say They Were Charity Workers,” Washington Post, May 26, 2002. 58. The prisoner in question was Adel Fattough Ali Algazzar. Dave Gilson, “Why Am I in Cuba?” Mother Jones, September-–October 2006; Simpson, “No Surprises in the War on Terror”; Andrew O. Selsky, “AP: Some Gitmo Detainees Freed Elsewhere,” USA Today, December 15, 2006. 59. Gary Stoller, “Homeland Security Generates Multibillion Dollar Business,” USA Today, September 10, 2006. 60. Sarah Anderson, John Cavanagh, Chuck Collins and Eric Benjamin, “Executive Excess 2006: Defense and Oil Executives Cash in on Conflict,” August 30, 2006, page 1, www.faireconomy.org. 61. Ratliff, “Fear, Inc.” 62. O’Harrow, No Place to Hide, 9. 15. A Corporatist State: Removing the Revolving Door, Putting in an Archway 1. Jim Krane, “Former President Bush Battles Arab Critics of His Son,” Associated Press, November 21, 2006. 2. Scott Shane and Ron Nixon, “In Washington, Contractors Take on Biggest Role Ever,” New York Times, February 4, 2007. 3. Jane Mayer, “Contract Sport,” The New Yorker, February 16, 2004. 4. “HR 5122: John Warner National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007 (Enrolled as Agreed to or Passed by Both House and Senate),” thomas.loc.gov. 5. “Remarks of Sen. Patrick Leahy on National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007, Conference Report, Congressional Record,” States News Service, September 29, 2006. 6. Gilead Sciences, “Stock Information: Historical Price Lookup,” www.gilead.com. 7. Interview with Stephen Kinzer, Democracy Now! April 21, 2006, www.democracynow.org. 8. The phrase “interrelated and mutually reinforcing” comes from the historian James A. Bill. Stephen Kinzer, Overthrow: America’s Century of Regime Change from Hawaii to Iraq (New York: Times Books, 2006), 122. 9. Robert Burns, “Defense Chief Shuns Involvement in Weapons and Merger Decisions to Avoid Conflict of Interest,” Associated Press, August 23, 2001; Matt Kelley, “Defense Secretary Sold Up to $91 Million in Assets to Comply with Ethics Rules, Complains about Disclosure Form,” Associated Press, June 18, 2002; Pauline Jelinek, “Rumsfeld Asks for Deadline Extension,” Associated Press, July 17, 2001. 10. John Stanton, “Big Stakes in Tamiflu Debate,” Roll Call, December 15, 2005. 11. Rumsfeld’s 2005 disclosure report shows that he holds “shares worth up to $95.9m, from which he got an income of up to $13m, owned land worth up to $17m, and made $1m from renting it out.” Geoffrey Lean and Jonathan Owen, “Donald Rumsfeld Makes $5m Killing on Bird Flu Drug,” Independent (London), March 12, 2006; Kelley, “Defense Secretary Sold up to $91 Million in Assets …” 12. Burns, “Defense Chief Shuns Involvement …” 13. Stanton, “Big Stakes in Tamiflu Debate.” 14. Nelson D. Schwartz, “Rumsfeld’s Growing Stake in Tamiflu,” Fortune, October 31, 2005. 15. Gilead Sciences, “Stock Information: Historical Price Lookup,” www.gilead.com. 16. Cassell Bryan-Low, “Cheney Cashed in Halliburton Options Worth $35 Million,” Wall Street Journal, September 20, 2000. 17. Ken Herman, “Cheneys Earn $8.8 Million to Bushes’ $735,000,” Austin American-Statesman, April 15, 2006; Halliburton, Investor Relations, “Historical Price Lookup,” www.halliburton.com. 18. Sarah Karush, “Once Privileged in Iraq, Russian Oil Companies Hope to Compete on Equal Footing After Saddam,” Associated Press, March 14, 2003; Saeed Shah, “Oil Giants Scramble for Iraqi Riches,” Independent (London), March 14, 2003. 19. “Waiting for the Green Light,” Petroleum Economist, October 1, 2006. 20. Lean and Owen, “Donald Rumsfeld Makes $5m Killing on Bird Flu Drug.” 21. Jonathan Weisman, “Embattled Rep. Ney Won’t Seek Reelection,” Washington Post, August 8, 2006; Sonya Geis and Charles R. Babcock, “Former GOP Lawmaker Gets 8 Years,” Washington Post, March 4, 2006; Judy Bachrach, “Washington Babylon,” Vanity Fair, August 1, 2006. 22. Eric Lipton, “Former Antiterror Officials Find Industry Pays Better,” New York Times, June 18, 2006. 23. Ellen Nakashima, “Ashcroft Finds Private-Sector Niche,” Washington Post, August 12, 2006; Lipton, “Former Antiterror Officials Find Industry Pays Better”; Good Harbor Consulting, LLC., www.goodharbor.net; Paladin Capital Group, “R. James Woolsey—VP,” Paladin Team, www.paladincapgroup.com; Booz Allen Hamilton, “R James Woolsey,” www.boozallen.com; Douglas Jehl, “Insiders’ New Firm Consults on Iraq,” New York Times, September 30, 2003; “Former FEMA Head to Start Consulting Business on Emergency Planning,” Associated Press, November 24, 2005. 24. “Former FEMA Head Discussed Wardrobe during Katrina Crisis,” Associated Press, November 3, 2005. 25. Seymour M. Hersh, “The Spoils of the Gulf War,” New Yorker, September 6, 1993. 26. Michael Isikoff and Mark Hosenball, “A Legal Counterattack,” Newsweek, April 16, 2003; John Council, “Baker Botts’ ‘Love Shack’ for Clients,” Texas Lawyer, March 6, 2006; Erin E. Arvedlund, “Russian Oil Politics in a Texas Court,” New York Times, February 15, 2005; Robert Bryce, “It’s a Baker Botts World,” The Nation, October 11, 2004. 27. Peter Smith and James Politi, “Record Pay-Outs from Carlyle and KKR,” Financial Times (London), October 20, 2004. 28. “Cutting James Baker’s Ties,” New York Times, December 12, 2003. 29. The information in the next two paragraphs is drawn from Naomi Klein, “James Baker’s Double Life: A Special Investigation,” The Nation, posted online October 12, 2004, www.thenation.com. 30. David Leigh, “Carlyle Pulls Out of Iraq Debt Recovery Consortium,” Guardian (London), October 15, 2004; United Nations Compensation Commission, “Payment of Compensation,” press releases, 2005–2006, www.unog.ch; Klein, “James Baker’s Double Life”; World Bank, “Data Sheet for Iraq,” October 23, 2006, www.worldbank.org. 31. Eric Schmitt, “New Group Will Lobby for Change in Iraqi Rule,” New York Times, November 15, 2002; George P. Shultz, “Act Now,” Washington Post, September 6, 2002; Harry Esteve, “Ex-Secretary Stumps for Gubernatorial Hopeful,” Oregonian (Portland), February 12, 2002; David R. Baker, “Bechtel Pulling Out after 3 Rough Years of Rebuilding Work,” San Francisco Chronicle, November 1, 2006. 32. Tim Weiner, “Lockheed and the Future of Warfare,” New York Times, November 28, 2004; Schmitt, “New Group Will Lobby for Change in Iraqi Rule”; John Laughland, “The Prague Racket,” Guardian (London), November 22, 2002; John B. Judis, “Minister without Portfolio,” The American Prospect, May 2003; Lockheed Martin, Investor Relations, “Stock Price Details,” www.lockheedmartin.com. 33. Bob Woodward, State of Denial (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006), 406–407. 34. James Dao, “Making a Return to the Political Stage,” New York Times, November 28, 2002; Leslie H. Gelb, “Kissinger Means Business,” New York Times, April 20, 1986; Jeff Gerth, “Ethics Disclosure Filed with Panel,” New York Times, March 9, 1989. 35. James Harding, “Kissinger Second Take,” Financial Times (London), December 14, 2002. 36. Seymour M. Hersh, “Lunch with the Chairman,” The New Yorker, March 17, 2003. 37. Ibid.; Thomas Donnelly and Richard Perle, “Gas Stations in the Sky,” Wall Street Journal, August 14, 2003. FOOTNOTE: R. Jeffrey Smith, “Tanker Inquiry Finds Rumsfeld’s Attention Was Elsewhere,” Washington Post, June 20, 2006; Tony Capaccio, “Boeing Proposes Bonds for 767 Lease Deal,” Seattle Times, March 4, 2003. 38. Hersh, “Lunch with the Chairman”; Tom Hamburger and Dennis Berman, “U.S. Adviser Perle Resigns as Head of Defense Board,” Wall Street Journal, March 28, 2003. 39. Interview with Richard Perle, CNN: Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer, March 9, 2003. 40. Judis, “Minister without Portfolio”; David S. Hilzenrath, “Richard N. Perle’s Many Business Ventures Followed His Years as a Defense Official,” Washington Post, May 24, 2004; Hersh, “Lunch with the Chairman”; T. Christian Miller, Blood Money: Wasted Billions, Lost Lives and Corporate Greed in Iraq (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2006), 73. 16. Erasing Iraq: In Search of a “Model” for the Middle East 1. Andrew M. Wyllie, “Convulsion Therapy of the Psychoses,” Journal of Mental Science 86 (March 1940): 248. 2. Richard Cohen, “The Lingo of Vietnam,” Washington Post, November 21, 2006. 3. “Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz Interview with Sam Tannenhaus, Vanity Fair,” News Transcript, May 9, 2003, www.defenselink.mil. 4. FOOTNOTE: 2007 Index of Economic Freedom (Washington, DC: Heritage Foundation and The Wall Street Journal, 2007), 326, www.heritage.org. 5. Thomas L. Friedman, “The Long Bomb,” New York Times, March 2, 2003; Joshua Muravchik, “Democracy’s Quiet Victory,” New York Times, August 19, 2002; Robert Dreyfuss, “Just the Beginning,” American Prospect, April 1, 2003. FOOTNOTE: John Norris, Collision Course: NATO, Russia, and Kosovo (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2005), xxii–xxiii. 6. George W. Bush, “President Discusses Education, Entrepreneurship & Home Ownership at Indiana Black Expo,” Indianapolis, Indiana, July 14, 2005. 7. Edwin Chen and Maura Reynolds, “Bush Seeks U.S.-Mideast Trade Zone to Bring Peace, Prosperity to Region,” Los Angeles Times, May 10, 2003. 8. Harlan Ullman, “‘Shock and Awe’ Misunderstood,” USA Today, April 8, 2003. 9. Peter Johnson, “Media’s War Footing Looks Solid,” USA Today, February 17, 2003. 10. Thomas L. Friedman, “What Were They Thinking?” New York Times, October 7, 2005. 11. United States Department of State, “Memoranda of Conversation,” June 10, 1976, declassified, www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv. 12. George W. Bush, speech made at 2005 Inauguration, January 20, 2005. 13. Norman Friedman, Desert Victory: The War for Kuwait (Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1991), 185; Michael R. Gordon and Bernard E. Trainor, Cobra II: The Inside Story of the Invasion and Occupation of Iraq (New York: Pantheon Books, 2006), 551. 14. Anthony Shadid, Night Draws Near: Iraq’s People in the Shadow of America’s War (New York: Henry Holt, 2005), galley, 95. Quoted with the author’s permission. 15. Harlan K. Ullman and James P. Wade, Shock and Awe: Achieving Rapid Dominance (Washington, DC: NDU Press Book, 1996), 55; Ron Suskind, The One Percent Doctrine: Deep Inside America’s Pursuit of Its Enemies Since 9/11 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006), 123, 214. 16. Ullman and Wade, Shock and Awe, xxv, 17, 23, 29. 17. Maher Arar, “‘I Am Not a Terrorist—I Am Not a Member of Al-Qaida,’” Vancouver Sun, November 5, 2003. 18. “Iraq Faces Massive U.S. Missile Barrage,” CBS News, January 24, 2003. 19. “U.S. Tests Massive Bomb,” CNN: Wolf Blitzer Reports, March 11, 2003. 20. Ibid. 21. Rajiv Chandrasekaran and Peter Baker, “Allies Struggle for Supply Lines,” Washington Post, March 30, 2003; Jon Lee Anderson, The Fall of Baghdad (New York: Penguin Press, 2004), 199; Gordon and Trainor, Cobra II, 465. FOOTNOTE: Charles Duelfer, Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD, vol. 1, September 30, 2004, 11, www.cia.gov. 22. Shadid, Night Draws Near, 71. 23. Suzanne Goldenberg, “War in the Gulf: In an Instant We Were Plunged into Endless Night,” Guardian (London), April 4, 2003. 24. “Restoring a Treasured Past,” Los Angeles Times, April 17, 2003. 25. Charles J. Hanley, “Looters Ransack Iraq’s National Library,” Associated Press, April 15, 2003. 26. Michael D. Lemonick, “Lost to the Ages,” Time, April 28, 2003; Louise Witt, “The End of Civilization,” Salon, April 17, 2003, www.salon.com. 27. Thomas E. Ricks and Anthony Shadid, “A Tale of Two Baghdads,” Washington Post, June 2, 2003. 28. Frank Rich, “And Now: ‘Operation Iraqi Looting,’” New York Times, April 27, 2003. 29. Donald H. Rumsfeld, “DoD News Briefing—Secretary Rumsfeld and Gen. Myers,” April 11, 2003, www.defenselink.mil; Simon Robinson, “Grounding Planes the Wrong Way,” Time, July 14, 2003. 30. Rajiv Chandrasekaran, Imperial Life in the Emerald City: Inside Iraq’s Green Zone (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006), 119–20. 31. Ibid., 165–66. 32. World Bank, World Development Report 1990 (Oxford: World Bank, 1990), 178–79; New Mexico Coalition for Literacy, New Mexico Literacy Profile, 2005–2006 Programs, www.nmcl.org. FOOTNOTE: Chandrasekaran, Imperial Life in the Emerald City, 5. 33. Shafiq Rasul, Asif Iqbal and Rhuhel Ahmed, Composite Statement: Detention in Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay (New York: Center for Constitutional Rights, July 26, 2004), 96, 99, www.ccr-ny.org. 34. Ibid., 9, 10, 21, 26, 72. 35. John F. Burns, “Looking Beyond His Critics, Bremer Sees Reason for Both Hope and Caution,” New York Times, June 29, 2004; Steve Kirby, “Bremer Says Iraq Open for Business,” Agence France-Presse, May 25, 2003. 36. Thomas B. Edsall and Juliet Eilperin, “Lobbyists Set Sights on Money-Making Opportunities in Iraq,” Washington Post, October 2, 2003. 17. Ideological Blowback: A Very Capitalist Disaster 1. According to Jeffrey Goldberg, Rice made the comment at a dinner in a Georgetown restaurant. He writes, “The remark stunned the other guests. [Brent] Scowcroft, as he later told friends, was flummoxed by Rice’s ‘evangelical tone.’” Jeffrey Goldberg, “Breaking Ranks,” The New Yorker, October 31, 2005. 2. Fareed Zakaria, “What Bush Got Right,” Newsweek, March 14, 2005. 3. Phillip Kurata, “Eastern Europeans Urge Iraq to Adopt Rapid Market Reforms,” Washington File, Bureau of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State, September 26, 2003, usinfo.state.gov; “Iraq Poll Finds Poverty Main Worry, Sadr Popular,” Reuters, May 20, 2004. 4. Joseph Stiglitz, “Shock without the Therapy,” Business Day (Johannesburg), February 20, 2004; Jim Krane, “U.S. Aims to Keep Iraq Military Control,” Associated Press, March 13, 2004. 5. Interview with Richard Perle, CNN: Anderson Cooper 360 Degrees, November 6, 2006; Interview with David Frum, CNN: Late Edition with Wolf Blitzer, November 19, 2006. 6. L. Paul Bremer III, My Year in Iraq: The Struggle to Build a Future of Hope (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006), 21. 7. Interview with Paul Bremer, PBS: The Charlie Rose Show, January 11, 2006. 8. Noelle Knox, “Companies Rush to Account for Staff,” USA Today, September 13, 2001; Harlan S. Byrne, “Disaster Relief: Insurance Brokers AON, Marsh Look to Recover, Even Benefit Post-September 11,” Barron’s, November 19, 2001. 9. General Garner’s plan for Iraq was straightforward enough: fix the infrastructure, hold quick and dirty elections, leave the shock therapy to the International Monetary Fund and concentrate on securing U.S. military bases on the model of the Philippines. “I think we should look right now at Iraq as our coaling station in the Middle East,” he told the BBC. Interview with General Jay Garner, conducted by Greg Palast, “Iraq for Sale,” BBC TV, March 19, 2004, www.gregpalast.com; Thomas Crampton, “Iraq Official Warns on Fast Economic Shift,” International Herald Tribune (Paris), October 14, 2003; Rajiv Chandrasekaran, “Attacks Force Retreat from Wide-Ranging Plans for Iraq,” Washington Post, December 28, 2003. 10. “Let’s All Go to the Yard Sale,” The Economist, September 27, 2003. 11. Coalition Provisional Authority, Order Number 37 Tax Strategy for 2003, September 19, 2003, www.iraqcoalition.org; Coalition Provisional Authority, Order Number 39 Foreign Investment, December 20, 2003, www.iraqcoalition.org; Dana Milbank and Walter Pincus, “U.S. Administrator Imposes Flat Tax System on Iraq,” Washington Post, November 2, 2003; Rajiv Chandrasekaran, “U.S. Funds for Iraq Are Largely Unspent,” Washington Post, July 4, 2004. FOOTNOTE: Mark Gregory, “Baghdad’s ‘Missing Billions,’” BBC News, November 9, 2006; David Pallister, “How the US Sent $12bn in Cash to Iraq. And Watched It Vanish,” Guardian (London), February 8, 2007. 12. Central Bank of Iraq and the Coalition Provisional Authority, “Saddam-Free Dinar Becomes Iraq’s Official Currency,” January 15, 2004, www.cpa-iraq.org; “Half of Iraqis Lack Drinking Water—Minister,” Agence France-Presse, November 4, 2003; Charles Clover and Peter Spiegel, “Petrol Queues Block Baghdad as Black Market Drains Off,” Financial Times (London), December 9, 2003. 13. Donald H. Rumsfeld, “Prepared Statement for the Senate Appropriations Committee,” Washington, DC, September 24, 2003, www.defenselink.mil; Borzou Daragahi, “Iraq’s Ailing Banking Industry Is Slowly Reviving,” New York Times, December 30, 2004; Laura MacInnis, “Citigroup, U.S. to Propose Backing Iraqi Imports,” Reuters, February 17, 2004; Justin Blum, “Big Oil Companies Train Iraqi Workers Free,” Washington Post, November 6, 2004. 14. Congressional Budget Office, Paying for Iraq’s Reconstruction: An Update, December 2006, page 15, www.cbo.gov; Chandrasekaran, “U.S. Funds for Iraq Are Largely Unspent.” 15. George W. Bush, “President Bush Addresses United Nations General Assembly,” New York City, September 23, 2003; George W. Bush, “President Addresses the Nation,” September 7, 2003. 16. James Glanz, “Violence in Iraq Curbs Work of 2 Big Contractors,” New York Times, April 22, 2004. 17. Rajiv Chandrasekaran, “Best-Connected Were Sent to Rebuild Iraq,” Washington Post, September 17, 2006; Holly Yeager, “Halliburton’s Iraq Army Contract to End,” Financial Times (London), July 13, 2006. 18. Office of Inspector General, USAID, Audit of USAID/Iraq’s Economic Reform Program, Audit Report Number E-266–04–004-P, September 20, 2004, pages 5–6, www.usaid.gov; USAID, “Award/Contract,” RAN-C-00–03–00043–00, www.usaid.gov; Mark Brunswick, “Opening of Schools to Test Iraqis’ Confidence,” Star Tribune (Minneapolis), September 17, 2006. FOOTNOTE: James Rupert, “Schools a Bright Spot in Iraq,” Seattle Times, June 30, 2004. 19. Ron Wyden, “Dorgan, Wyden, Waxman, Dingell Call to End Outsourcing of Oversight for Iraq Reconstruction,” press release, May 5, 2004, wyden.senate.gov; “Carolinas Companies Find Profits in Iraq,” Associated Press, May 2, 2004; James Mayfield, “Understanding Islam and Terrorism—9/11,” August 6, 2002, was at www.texashoustonmission.org, accessed January 7, 2005; Sis Mayfield, “Letters from President Mayfield,” February 27, 2004, was at www.texashoustonmission.org, accessed January 7, 2005. 20. Rajiv Chandrasekaran, “Defense Skirts State in Reviving Iraqi Industry,” Washington Post, May 14, 2007. 21. This account of Gaidar’s comments comes from Mark Masarskii, an adviser on entrepreneurship to the Moscow government. Jim Krane, “Iraq’s Fast Track to Capitalism Scares Baghdad’s Businessmen,” The Associated Press, December 3, 2003; Lynn D. Nelson and Irina Y. Kuzes, “Privatization and the New Business Class,” in Russia in Transition: Politics, Privatization, and Inequality, ed. David Lane (London: Longman, 1995), 129. FOOTNOTE: Kevin Begos, “Good Intentions Meet Harsh Reality,” Winston-Salem Journal, December 19, 2004. 22. Dahr Jamail and Ali al-Fadhily, “U.S. Resorting to ‘Collective Punishment,’” Inter Press Service, September 18, 2006. 23. Gilbert Burnham et al., “Mortality after the 2003 Invasion of Iraq: A Cross-Sectional Cluster Sample Survey,” Lancet 368 (October 12, 2006): 1421–28. 24. Ralph Peters, “Last Gasps in Iraq,” USA Today, November 2, 2006. 25. Oxford Research International, National Survey of Iraq, February 2004, page 20, news.bbc.co.uk; Donald MacIntyre, “Sistani Most Popular Iraqi Leader, US Pollsters Find,” Independent (London), August 31, 2004. 26. Bremer, My Year in Iraq, 71. 27. “The Lost Year in Iraq,” PBS Frontline, October 17, 2006. 28. Patrick Graham, “Beyond Fallujah: A Year with the Iraqi Resistance,” Harper’s, June 1, 2004. 29. Rajiv Chandrasekaran, Imperial Life in the Emerald City: Inside Iraq’s Green Zone (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2006), 118. 30. Alan Wolfe, “Why Conservatives Can’t Govern,” Washington Monthly, July/August 2006. 31. Ariana Eunjung Cha, “In Iraq, the Job Opportunity of a Lifetime,” Washington Post, May 23, 2004. 32. Chandrasekaran, Imperial Life in the Emerald City, 214–18; T. Christian Miller, “U.S. Priorities Set Back Its Healthcare Goals in Iraq,” Los Angeles Times, October 30, 2005. 33. Jim Krane, “Iraqi Businessmen Now Face Competition,” Associated Press, December 3, 2003. 34. Chandrasekaran, Imperial Life in the Emerald City, 288. 35. “National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2007,” Congressional Record—Senate, June 14, 2006, page S5855. 36. Griff Witte, “Despite Billions Spent, Rebuilding Incomplete,” Washington Post, November 12, 2006; Dan Murphy, “Quick School Fixes Won Few Iraqi Hearts,” Christian Science Monitor, June 28, 2004. 37. Griff Witte, “Contractors Rarely Held Responsible for Misdeeds in Iraq,” Washington Post, November 4, 2006; T. Christian Miller, “Contractor’s Plans Lie Among Ruins of Iraq,” Los Angeles Times, April 29, 2006; James Glanz, “Inspectors Find Rebuilt Projects Crumbling in Iraq,” New York Times, April 29, 2007; James Glanz, “Billions in Oil Missing in Iraq, U.S. Study Says,” New York Times, May 12, 2007. 38. E-mail interview with Kristine Belisle, deputy assistant inspector general for Congressional and Public Affairs, special inspector general for Iraq reconstruction, December 15, 2006. 39. Griff Witte, “Invoices Detail Fairfax Firm’s Billing for Iraq Work,” Washington Post, May 11, 2005; Charles R. Babcock, “Contractor Bilked U.S. on Iraq Work, Federal Jury Rules,” Washington Post, March 10, 2006; Erik Eckholm, “Lawsuit Accuses a Contractor of Defrauding U.S. Over Work in Iraq,” New York Times, October 9, 2004. 40. Renae Merle, “Verdict against Iraq Contractor Overturned,” Washington Post, August 19, 2006; Erik Eckholm, “On Technical Grounds, Judge Sets Aside Verdict of Billing Fraud in Iraq Rebuilding,” New York Times, August 19, 2006. 41. Dahr Jamail and Ali al-Fadhily, “Bechtel Departure Removes More Illusions,” Inter Press Service, November 9, 2006; Witte, “Despite Billions Spent, Rebuilding Incomplete.” 42. Anthony Shadid, Night Draws Near: Iraq’s People in the Shadow of America’s War (New York: Henry Holt, 2005), 173, 175.
